OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

Text Classics

KENNETH COOK was born in Sydney in 1929, and attended Fort Street High School. He went on to work as a journalist, among other jobs. InWake in Fright,his second novel, Cook drew on his observations of Broken Hill, in New South Wales, where he spent a couple of years in the early fifties working for the Australian Broadcasting Commission.Wake in Fright waspublished in 1961 to high praise in New York and London, and launched Cook’s writing career.

Wake in Frightwas made into a film a decade later, arguably the greatest film ever made in Australia. It starred Donald Pleasence, Chips Rafferty and Jack Thompson in his first screen role. Lost for many years, the restored film was re-released to acclaim in 2009.

Cook was not only a novelist but a political activist and a romantically impulsive entrepreneur. Opposed to Australia’s involvement in the Vietnam War in the late 1960s, he stood twice unsuccessfully for federal government on an anti-conscription ticket. One of his proudest possessions was a congratulatory telegram he received from President Ho Chi Minh. Later, on a whim he opened a butterfly farm on the Hawkesbury River, installing his kids and friends to attract tourists and insect lovers. Needless to say it failed. His chain of poor luck was broken by the success of his comic bush stories written soon after this, includingKiller Koala.

Cook wrote twenty-one books in all, along with screenplays and scripts for radio and TV. After separating from and then divorcing his first wife, Patricia, with whom he had four children, he married the writer and editor Jacqueline Kent in 1987, a few months before his death at the age of fifty-seven.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

PETER TEMPLE is one of Australia’s finest writers. His novelTruthwon the 2010 Miles Franklin Award and the Victorian Premier’s Literary Award. Temple has written nine novels and has been published in more than twenty countries.

DAVID STRATTON is co-presenter ofAt the Movieson ABC television and film critic for theAustralian.He has also served as a President of the International Critics Jury for the Cannes and Venice Film Festivals, written three books and is currently lecturing in Film History at the University of Sydney.

ALSO BY KENNETH COOK

Eliza Fraser

Stormalong

Blood Red Roses

Wanted Dead

Take This Hammer

The Wine of God’s Anger

Stockade

The Film Makers

Letter to the Pope

Money Menagerie

Bloodhouse

Tuna

Pig

Killer Koala

Wombat Revenge

Frill-Necked Frenzy

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

Proudly supported by Copyright Agency’s Cultural Fund.

textclassics.com.au

textpublishing.com.au

The Text Publishing Company

Swann House

22 William Street

Melbourne Victoria 3000

Australia

Copyright © Kenneth Cook 1961

Introduction copyright © Peter Temple 2001

Afterword copyright © David Stratton 2009

Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders and obtain permission for the use of copyright material. The publisher apologises for any errors or omissions and would be grateful if notified of any corrections that should be incorporated in future reprints or editions of this book.

All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright above, no part of this publication shall be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior permission of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.

First published by Michael Joseph 1961

First published by The Text Publishing Company in 2001

This edition published 2012

Designed by WH Chong

Typeset by Midland Typesetters

Primary print ISBN: 9781921922169

Ebook ISBN: 9781921921780

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

Table of Contents

Cover Page

About the Author

About the Introducer / Also by

Title Page

Copyright

Introduction by Peter Temple

Wake in Fright

Dedication

Afterword by David Stratton

Text Classics

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

A NOVEL OF MENACE

Peter Temple

Wake in Frightwas first published in 1961 when Kenneth Cook was thirty-two. It was his second novel, the first having been withdrawn because of a threat of legal action. It was a publishing success, appearing in England and America, translated into several languages, and a prescribed text in schools. It might be forty years since the novel appeared yet it retains its freshness, its narrative still compels, and its bleak vision still disquiets.

The film version, directed by American Ted Kotcheff and with a cast that included the evil-exuding Donald Pleasance, also met with critical approval on its release. Outside Australia, the film was calledOutback(and probably set Australian tourism back at least twenty years). Its opening sequence remains in the mind—the 360-degree panorama of a flat, empty landscape, the lonely, flyspotted and comfortless pub, the toy train inching across the plain, the open-faced young man waiting on the crude platform.

Wake in Frightis about a young teacher’s five days in a rough outback mining town called Bundanyabba (‘the Yabba’ to the locals). John Grant doesn’t plan to spend five days there; he is passing through, staying overnight before catching the plane to Sydney, 1200 miles away. He has already come six hours by train from his one-room school in Tiboonda, a name bestowed on a pub and two ant-eaten shacks floating in a dust sea.

In the words of Grant, at the beginning of the story, in places like Tiboonda ‘a man felt he had either to drink or blow his brains out’. (It has not crossed his mind yet that choosing the former will not preclude the latter.)

One night to pass in the Yabba. One hot night. Then the plane to Sydney, the sea, civilisation, six weeks to impress the delectably unobtainable Robyn. But, on this hot night in the Yabba, Grant goes into a pub, smoky, raucous.

A few feverish hours later, he has nothing. He is stone broke. He has gone from being a man with a cheque for six weeks’ holiday pay and twenty pounds in cash in his pocket to being someone who has two shillings and eleven cigarettes to his name.

In the morning, hungover, Grant eats his paid-for hotel breakfast, takes his cases and wanders the streets. By 9.30 a.m. the mullock heaps wobble in the haze, the tar is beginning tobubble. Desperate, guilt-ridden, panic in his throat, he goes into a pub, buys a pony, the smallest measure, plans to nurse it. A middle-aged local befriends him. He accepts a beer. A second beer.

The next few days pass as if in a nightmare, an alcohol-induced fog in which Grant is in the company of shadowy strangers whose actions and motives are a mystery to him. When the mist lifts, the educated, Sydney-bred John Grant is no more. Now there is a self-loathing man in a threadbare park, dirty, red-eyed, breath of half-raw rabbit, sitting against a tree and looking at a rifle, one bullet left.

Former Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating once said of his home town: ‘If you’re not living in Sydney, you’re camping out.’ The sentiment draws a clean, derogatory distinction between the two Australian worlds, between centre and periphery.

Kenneth Cook was born in Sydney, where he attended Fort Street Boys’ School. His fictional town of Bundan-yabba is based on Broken Hill where he spent some time as a journalist.

Cook’s experience of both Sydney and camping out fixed in him a view that there were two Australias (and two kinds of Australians, two species almost). One is represented by John Grant and by middle-class, white-collar Sydney: urban,educated, sophisticated. The other is the interior, the crude, heat-smacked, beer-swilling blue-collar world represented by flyspeck Tiboonda and by Bundanyabba, both in the middle of nowhere:‘somewhere not far out in the shimmering haze was the state border, marked by a broken fence…further out in the heat was the silent centre of Australia, the Dead Heart.’

John Grant is in the outback because it is the only way he can pay out his teaching bond. He is as much in exile as any English convict. His teaching he looks upon with all the hopelessness of the missionary preaching the gospel to people who do not understand a word he is saying. He combines a deep distaste for the landscape and climate of the inland with a contempt for the white inhabitants. This dislike is spelled out from the opening pages:‘Another year in this apology for a town, himself an outcast in a community of people who were at home in the bleak and frightening land that spread out around him now, hot, dry and careless of itself and the people who professed to own it.’

Cook will have nothing of what historian Richard White called ‘the familiar iconography of outback Australia—the homestead, the sheep, the lonely gum and the proud Aborigine’. For him, the place is a variation of hell. And the ability to be at home in the ‘bleak and frightening land’ is a flaw in the outback’s people. There is something wrong with themfor enduring this harsh place, They are not the innocent victims of the lonely, arid land; they have made an unnatural choice to live in it that reflects their own stunted, even perverted, nature. Their epitome is Cook’s character Doc Tydon. Only in the outback could the drunken, vaguely sinister dispenser of stale beer and benzedrine be accepted.

Of course, Australian writers (and others, notably D. H. Lawrence) have always been unkind about the Australian character in general. In the 1940s, the poet James McAuley wrote:

The people are hard-eyed, kindly, with nothing inside

them, The men are independent but you could not call them free.

Cook’s lip curls as cruelly as anyone’s in his distaste, but it is reserved for the white inhabitants of the inland. His character John Grant is a ‘coastal Australian’, something that sets him above the people of the inland. Sydney, civilisation, escaping the heat and the glare, these are the things in Grant’s dreams. And the sea, above all the sea: lying in the sea, soaking out the dust of the outback. ‘The sea, twelve hundred miles to the east, had swelled and fallen in its tides, day in and day out, for a year, and he had not seen it.’

Grant’s longing for the sea, for the coast, is a familiar onein Australian writing. The coast symbolises home, women, a place where people are civilised, genteel, read books and talk about ideas. It is not like the inland, which is alien and male and devoid of anything resembling cultural life. From the coast the ships sail, and for a colonial to put a foot on the deck of a ship bound for home is already to be home.The sea joins all coasts; thus the coast is tied to the old country; to leave the coast is to stretch further—and possibly to break—the cord that joins the exile to the mother country, to the world.

Once upon a time, London had Sydney. It had lots of Sydneys, one in each colony. The Sydneys aped the colonial metropolis, affected its customs and mores, cloned its buildings and its institutions. And then the Sydneys gained their own possessions—their Yabbas, their internal colonies. Men went to these places to seek their fortunes, dug holes, endured heat, froze. Womenless, they found ways to live with the absence of permissible affections. The law that followed them punished the indigenes to its letter. But it laid its truncheon lightly on whites who followed the unwritten rules. What would be jailable offences in the Sydneys were tolerated or looked away from.

And so the Yabbas, like places of incarceration everywhere, near-total institutions, became their own worlds.The people in them first stopped looking outwards, then they lookedinwards, then they stopped looking.They simplywere.

It is a place like this that Cook captures so well inWake in Fright.TheYabba is a city of men, isolated on the endless empty inland plain, its houses clustered on a slight eminence. At night, from afar, the author sees the town’s lights as looking like those of a fleet of ships standing in a vast, dark roadstead. And the Yabba is like a ship—there is nowhere to go, it is an enclosed world with its own rituals, customs and punishments. No one on board can stand aloof. Not to be absorbed, not to seek absorption, is to give offence. It is this desire of the Yabba’s people to suck in strangers, to process them, to homogenise them, that the city-bred John Grant finds hard to understand.

But he knows instinctively that he must try to keep these people at arm’s length or they will take him over, colonise him.

In a pivotal scene, Grant succumbs to the generosity of his pub benefactor,Tim Hynes, and goes home with him. Here all is stuffy, suburban lower-middle-class normality—the darkened sitting room, the thick carpet, the armchairs, the cigarettes in an ornate box on the coffee table. Polite Mrs Hynes prepares a meal. Silent Miss Hynes is a dutiful daughter, makes polite conversation with the guest. But for the heat, it could be a home in Double Bay.Yet we feel immediatelythat it is not an ordinary petit bourgeois household: Tim Hynes’s hospitality seems too insistent, too demanding; Miss Hynes may be a succubus.The last thing John Grant remembers is someone asking, ‘How do you find the Yabba, John?’

John Grant is finding the Yabba too much by far. But the transient’s ordeal is not over; Grant has some way to go before he knows he is at the bedrock. Still to come are the most memorable—disturbing, haunting—scenes of the novel.

WhenWake in Frightwas first published, the respected American critic Anthony Boucher, writing in theNew York Times,called Cook a ‘vivid new talent’. Overall, Boucher was impressed, but he disagreed with the publisher putting the book in ‘the genre of the taut novel of suspense’. Boucher sawWake in Frightas ‘a perfectly straight mainstream novel of growing up’.

He was half-right about this. It is not a novel of suspense as most people would use the term. It is a novel ofmenace:the land exudes menace; the people seem always half in the dark, exchanging glances, concealing their real intentions behind shows of generosity. There is also the menace that accompanies John Grant’s hubris. He is arrogant and disdainful and for this we know he must pay a price.

And what of the ‘novel of growing up’ that Anthony Boucher identified? In some way, the five days in the Yabbado amount to John Grant’s passage into adulthood. He is profoundly changed by the privation, temptation and degradation he experiences. What is more interesting, however, is Grant’s regression. Cook, like many Australian writers before him, has no confidence in the durability of civilisation’s armour. Grant may be clothed in all the trappings of a more civilised culture but beneath them he is just another brutal and lustful upright animal. Cook recognises that some black flower sleeps in the human heart, waits for the right moment to open its blood petals. In war, many men have found this awful bud bloom in themselves, succumbed to it and been haunted by it even to old age as they limp in medal-chinking columns to honour their own dead.

Wake in Frightis a young writer’s work: romantic, at times naive. It also suffers from some uncertainty of character and there are problems of balance. These are flaws but they are outmuscled by the writer’s strengths. Cook can make us feel the heat, see the endless horizon, hear the sad singing on a little train as it traverses the monotonous plain: ‘The homesteads were just yellow patches of light in window-frames, but the train driver sounded his whistle just the same and, in the darkness, there were children waving just the same.’

And Cook has range too. He captures the icy, flooding charm of the first beer on a heat-struck day. He knows whatit feels like to catch luck’s eye and hold the gaze across a smoky room, to feel the irrationaldeservednessof it, to hear fortune singing sweet in the veins. And he knows dark things—the frightening chasm that opens when certainty disappears, the savagery in the human heart.

Wake in Frighthas the power to disturb, a rare thing in any novel.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

Wake in Fright

May you dream of the Devil and wake in fright.

AN OLD CURSE

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

For Patricia

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

[1]

He sat at his desk, wearily watching the children file out of the room, reflecting that, this term at least, it was reasonable to assume that none of the girls was pregnant.

‘Goodbye, sir,’ said the last of the children to leave.

‘Goodbye, Mason,’ said the teacher,‘I’ll see you next term,’ and the small, shabby figure was lost in the glare of the doorway—the class was now no more than a babble of eager voices floating and fading in the heat.

The teacher looked around the empty room, which comprised the whole of the school, apart from some crude toilet facilities in the grounds. Twenty-two desks for twenty-eight pupils, boys and girls aged from five to seventeen.Twenty-eight pupils, twenty-seven at school only because the law insisted on their being educated until they were at least fifteen, or because some desperate farmer, clawing a living from the clods of the great inland plains, thought that in education there might be for his child a little of the hope that he had abandoned.

And the twenty-eighth, young Mason—eleven years old, hungry to learn, eager, intelligent and inexplicably sensitive, but doomed to join the railway gangs as soon as he was legally old enough, because his father was a ganger.

The teacher stood up and flexed his shoulders to loosen the wet shirt from his body and began to close and lock the windows.

Through the glass he could see the plains stretching west, broken only by rare clumps of the hardy saltbush that managed to draw sustenance even here where the earth had been innocent of any trace of moisture for months. Somehow people coaxed a living from the semi-desert, somehow they ran sheep and cattle—one head every ten acres—and kept them alive while they gained enough condition to bring a few pounds in the coastal markets of Australia, but the schoolteacher could never understand how. Some people, owners of thousands of square miles, even made fortunes here by waiting for the occasional falls of rain, then bringing in herdsto feed on the carpet of green grass that appeared overnight. But now there had been no rain for almost a year, the sun had withered every living thing except the saltbush. The people had withered, their skins contracting and their eyes sinking as their stock became white bones. But they stayed in the wooden homes, because they believed the rain would fall some time.

The schoolteacher knew that somewhere not far out in the shimmering haze was the state border, marked by a broken fence, and that further out in the heat was the silent centre of Australia, the Dead Heart. He looked through the windows almost with pleasure, because tonight he would be on his way to Bundanyabba; tomorrow morning he would board an aircraft; and tomorrow night he would be in Sydney, and on Sunday he would swim in the sea. For the schoolteacher was a coastal Australian, a native of the strip of continent lying between the Pacific Ocean and the Great Dividing Range, where Nature deposited the graces she so firmly withheld from the west.

The sea, twelve hundred miles to the east, had swelled and fallen in its tides, day in and day out for a year, and he had not seen it. For twelve months he had been master of the one-teacher school at Tiboonda, twelve months with only his leave pay to carry him through the term holidays. So he hadspent them in Bundanyabba, the mining city of sixty thousand people which was the centre of life in the territory around the border. But to the schoolteacher it was just a larger variation of Tiboonda, and Tiboonda was a variation of hell.

But now the long Christmas vacation had arrived, six weeks’ leave, with six weeks’ pay.Two weeks’ pay would cover his air fare to Sydney and back, and there would be four weeks’ pay left, eked out by judicious visits to relatives. Six weeks by the sea, to just lie in the water and soak out the dust that had seeped into his being.

He finished with the windows and looked around, aware of the smell of the classroom which always seemed stronger when the children had gone. A chalky smell, an inky smell, a suggestion of body smells and stale sandwiches and brown apple cores, all mingled with the smell of the dust which, even in the room, stirred and eddied about his feet as he moved.

He picked up his briefcase and walked out into the sun. He always winced when the sun hit him. He could not pick up the trick the locals had of keeping their eyes perpetually screwed in a squint. He forced the wooden door into its sagging frame and turned the lock. Then he shook his head and fished out his sunglasses. In a year in the west he had not been able to make up his mind whether the glasses were any use or not. The glare was white with them off and grey withthem on, if glare can be grey, and the shafts of white came in at the side, like little pointed pieces of stone driving at his eyes.

He tried to keep his lids closed as much as possible as he walked across the schoolyard, past the fiction of a sapling fence that rose out of the white dust in futile protest against the possibility of stray cattle wandering into the playing area.

The road was distinguishable from the paddocks only by the deep tyre tracks in the dust, and the schoolteacher could feel his feet sinking in it as he walked.

One hundred yards from the school was the hotel, and near that the railway siding called Tiboonda Station.The three buildings made up the township of Tiboonda. All were timber and iron, all built in the monotonous, low box-form that characterises western architecture; and all were riddled with white ants and dry-rot.They stood in the plain abjectly, as though they no longer made any serious claim to constitute a township.

The schoolteacher walked slowly, trying not to raise the dust. In all directions little white clouds showed where his pupils, on foot, bicycle, and horseback, were scattering to the railway camps, farmhouses and native shanties where they lived.

For them the six weeks’ holiday meant six weeks herewhere the creek bed was dry and cracked and the water to drink had to be brought from Bundanyabba by train, and all they could do was play in the dust, or perhaps tease the wild camels whose ancestors formed the inland’s transport system.

He reached the hotel and walked across the drooping veranda floor into the bar. It was shady in here, but not cool. It was never cool in Tiboonda, except at night in deep winter when the cold bit into your bones. In the winter you wished for the summer, in the summer you wished for the winter, and all the time you wished to blazes you were a thousand miles from Tiboonda. But you had two years to fill in for the Education Department, and if you left before that, you forfeited the bond your uncle had put up for you when you were fool enough to think you wanted to take up teaching for a living. And so you’d stay here for another year, unless by the grace of God you could persuade the Department to move you east before that, and God probably didn’t have that much grace to spare.

‘Schooner, Charlie,’ he said to the hotelkeeper, who emerged from his dark back room wearing, for some reason, a waistcoat over his drenched shirt.

Charlie pulled the beer.

In the remote towns of the west there are few of the amenities of civilisation; there is no sewerage, there are nohospitals, rarely a doctor; the food is dreary and flavourless from long carrying, the water is bad; electricity is for the few who can afford their own plant, roads are mostly nonexistent; there are no theatres, no picture shows and few dance halls; and the people are saved from stark insanity by the one strong principle of progress that is ingrained for a thousand miles east, north, south and west of the Dead Heart—the beer is always cold.

The teacher let his finger curl around the beaded glass, quelling the little spurt of bitterness that rose when he saw the size of the head of froth on the beer, because, after all, it didn’t matter, and this poor devil of a hotelkeeper had to stay here and he was going east.

He drank quickly at first, swamping the dryness in his throat in a flood of beer; and then, when the glass was half empty, he drank slowly, letting the cold alcohol relax his body.

‘Will you be wanting your room when you come back?’ asked Charlie, scratching his belly through a tear in the shirt.

‘Where else would I stay?’

‘Fella before you stayed in a caravan, Jackie: thought you might want a change from the old pub too.’

The hotelkeeper was mocking him with the sneering irony that western people used on those who show no affection for their desolate territory.

‘I’ll be back here.’

‘I’ll try and keep your room for you.’ The only permanent guests Charlie ever had were the masters of the Tiboonda school.

‘Thanks.’

If by any chance the hotel were burned down would the Department have to close the school? Or would another small wooden box be hastily thrown up in the school grounds to provide the master with accommodation?

‘Having another one, Jack?’

‘Thanks.’ He pushed the glass across the stained and grooved bar top and drew a packet of cigarettes from his pocket.

It was almost two hours since he had smoked at the afternoon recess, and the tingling satisfaction supplemented the beer; he looked almost kindly upon the hotelkeeper. But he had to look away soon.

Charlie had served the second glass of beer and was leaning against the shelves of bottles that served to bolster the illusion that there were those within fifty miles of Tiboonda who would think of drinking anything but beer. He was sucking on the disintegrating remains of a handmade cigarette. Soon he spat the obscene object on to the floor.

‘Going on the four-fifteen, Jack?’

‘Yes.’ He glanced at the hotelkeeper’s fat and grimy hands and decided he did not want the rest of his beer.

‘See you in six weeks, Charlie.’

‘Sure, Jack. See you then.’ Charlie grinned without humour or goodwill, as though he knew the schoolteacher’s return to Tiboonda was something he did not want to think about.

‘Goodbye, Charlie,’ and goodbye to the stifling back room, the greasy meals prepared by Charlie’s half-caste mistress in the filthy kitchen; goodbye to the sleepless nights and the arid dawns when the soft light gave false promise of a moment’s release from the heat; goodbye to his twenty-eight pupils and their suspicious parents with shamed faces; goodbye Tiboonda, for six weeks at any rate.

He had his two suitcases packed and waiting in the bar, and he picked them up and walked across to the station.The single line swung out across the plain in a long curve, black against the dust. On the horizon he could see the small, dark cloud that could have been the first finger of a rain cloud. The cloud was almost imperceptibly running down the line, and in half an hour or so the four-fifteen would be in Tiboonda.

He wished he had stayed in the hotel a little longer because the lean-to shelter on the station offered no determined opposition to the direct beat of the sun; but it was doubtfulwhether the sun was worse than Charlie in any case.

He took out his wallet, and inspected his pay cheque again. One hundred and forty pounds, six weeks’ wages and district allowance.There should be no trouble changing it to buy his ticket at the airways office, any bank would probably take a Departmental cheque once he established his identity.

There were twenty pound notes in his wallet as well, the savings from his wages for the past term. He had calculated on saving a hundred, but beer was expensive in Tiboonda, and a man felt he had either to drink or blow his brains out.

Still, he must take it a little more easily next term. ‘Next term’, the thought was like a nervous start, ‘next term’, six weeks away, another year in Tiboonda would begin again. Another year in this apology for a town, himself an outcast in a community of people who were at home in the bleak and frightening land that spread out around him now, hot, dry and careless of itself and the people who professed to own it.

Better not think about that. Better not think about anything, except the sea, draw the image across his mind like a deep shadow and pretend that it warded off the heat that seemed to thrust long, hot fingers through his skull into the living, tender cells of his brain.

In its own good time the four-fifteen arrived at Tiboonda. Its alternate name was the Friday Train, which distinguishedit from the Monday Train. The two were Tiboonda’s only transport connection with the outside world, represented by Bundanyabba, apart from the road, which could not be travelled when it rained because of the mud, nor when it was dry because of the dust which would bog cars just as hopelessly as mud would.

The Friday Train pulled a dozen freight cars and two passenger carriages. The engine was the superb type of monster that can only be found in the remoter sections of the Commonwealth, and which always reminded the teacher of the sort of thing Indians chased in American western films.

Even before the train pulled into the siding, he could hear the singing. On every slow train in the west they sing, the stockmen and the miners, the general storekeepers and the drifting workers; the Aborigines and the half-castes shyly joining in on the outskirts. And somebody always has a mouth organ, and they sing with desperate, tuneless gaiety the songs of the American hit parades which filter through the networks of the Australian Broadcasting Commission or from the static-ridden apparatus of the occasional country radio station.

Out over the desert plains, behind the roar and grind of the ancient engines, the dreary words and trite tunes of modern America caused the dingoes to cock their ears inwonder, and deepened measurably the sadness that permeates the outback of Australia.

The singers had all congregated in the front carriage.The schoolteacher boarded the rear carriage. He didn’t want to sing. He was alone except for a middle-aged Aboriginal stockman with white hair and the stubble of a white beard. He was a full-blood, with the broad features of his people, and he stared constantly out of the window as though there might be something in the plains he had not seen before.

The schoolteacher had seen the plains, and he had made the trip to Bundanyabba before, so he knew that, for the six-hour journey ahead, the countryside would change so little there would be almost nothing to indicate that the train had moved.

He put his bags on the luggage rack, opened a window, and stretched out on a seat, with his feet poised on an armrest.

‘There is a heart that’s made for you,’ the singers were chanting,

‘A heart that needs your love divine,

A heart that could be strong and true,

If only you would say you’re mine.

If we should part my heart would break,

Oh say that this will never be,

Oh darling please, your promise make,

That you’ll belong to only me.’

And that, thought the schoolteacher, was the fate of a race of singers who had long since forgotten how to make songs.

He closed his eyes as the train began to move. The clatter of the wheels, the sound of the engine and the discordant cries of the singers formed a senseless rhythm as he drifted into the semi-coma of the train traveller.

•

The Friday Train swayed on across the plains and once every five miles or so there would be a decrepit homestead, and the train driver would sound his whistle. A ragged band of children would assemble and conscientiously wave and wave until the train was out of sight and there was no more train until Monday.

Eventually the sun relinquished its torturing hold and the plains became brown and purple and gold and then black as the sky was pierced by a million bursts of flickering light from dispassionate worlds unthinkable distances apart.The homesteads were just yellow patches of light in window frames,but the train driver sounded his whistle just the same and, in the darkness, there were children waving just the same.

•

The schoolteacher shook himself into full consciousness as the train approached Bundanyabba.The city was a smatter of lights rather higher than the level of the plains, looking a little like the lights of a cluster of ships riding motionless on a still dark sea.

The teacher took off his sunglasses and tucked them in his breast pocket. The singers had given up now and were presumably devoting themselves to gathering their luggage and shaking off the fug of an hour or so’s dozing.

The Friday Train was rocking through the city and he looked out on the rows of weatherboard houses, built on tiny blocks of land as though there was a scarcity of space, or as though they had to huddle together to form a garrison against the loneliness of the outback.

The schoolteacher knew Bundanyabba fairly well from the two term holidays he had spent there. He had swum in the chlorinated swimming pool, attended the picture theatres, drunk the heavily preserved beer that had to be railed from the coast, and thus had exhausted the pleasures offered. Hewished there had been an aircraft flying eastwards that evening.

The train stopped with a relieved clatter as though glad it had arrived, and rather surprised that it had successfully traversed the plains once more. Grant carried his bags through the bustle on the station and handed the forward half of his return ticket to the collector. The other half he carefully stowed in his wallet against the time when he would pass through these gates again. He consciously ignored the torn scrap of cardboard’s silent statement that he had not seen the last of Tiboonda.

Outside the station several taxi drivers were waiting, touting for custom.The schoolteacher engaged one and gave him the address of the hotel to which he had written booking a room for the night.

‘New to The Yabba?’ said the taxi driver as he drove through the wide streets, lined with buildings affecting awnings supported by poles which looked as though they suffered from rickets.

‘Yes,’ said the schoolteacher.

‘Staying long?’

‘Just tonight.’

‘That’s hard luck. You ought to see a bit more of The Yabba than that.’

One would have thought, reflected the teacher, that thedriver was trying to sell a conducted tour, but he had noticed before that all the people of Bundanyabba seemed to be extremely patriotic.

‘You think it’s worth seeing?’ he said.

‘I’ll say I do. Everybody likes The Yabba. Best place in Australia.’

‘So? Why?’ He knew he was taking a risk, the determination of Bundanyabba people to deliver monologues on the virtues of the place required less encouragement than that. Still, he was only committed to listen for the length of the taxi journey.

‘Well,’ the driver was saying, ‘it’s a free and easy place. Nobody cares who you are or where you come from; as long as you’re a good bloke you’re all right. Friendly place it is. I’ve been here eight years. Came out from Sydney because I had a bad chest. Chest cleared up in six months but I wouldn’t think of leavin’The Yabba.’

The schoolteacher had also previously observed the friendly habits of the people of Bundanyabba, and found them crude and embarrassing. As for the city’s therapeutic qualities, the taxi driver looked sallow and drawn, and distinctly in need of a change to the kinder climate of the coast.

‘Try and stay a bit longer,’ urged the taxi driver as the schoolteacher paid him.

The teacher fancied he had been overcharged, but he wasn’t sure.

The girl behind the reception desk at the hotel was a faded facsimile of girls behind reception desks all over the world.

‘Have you a room for John Grant? I made a booking by letter.’

The girl picked up a large ledger without speaking and began turning over the pages. Grant put down his suitcases and stood waiting patiently enough.The girl found the page containing the night’s bookings and slowly ran a finger down the column from the top. The finger stopped halfway down the page and she looked up.

‘You only stopping the night?’

‘That’s all.’

‘You’ll have to pay now.’

‘That will be all right.’

‘Will you be wanting breakfast?’

‘Yes, please.’

‘Then it will be one pound ten.’

He took out two pound notes and gave them to her. She handed him in return a large piece of metal inscribed with the number seven and with two keys attached.

‘One’s for the front door and one’s for your room,’ said the girl in a monotone, as though she had said it many timesbefore, which of course she had, ‘there’s ten shillings deposit on the keys. You’ll get that back when you bring the keys back.’

‘Good, thank you.’

She lost interest in him and returned to the vacuous contemplation practised by her kind.

‘Could you tell me where room seven is, please?’

‘Up-the-steps-and-down-the-corridor-to-the-right,’ she said, as though it was all one word, without raising her eyes.

She at least was no apostle of the friendship doctrine of Bundanyabba, thought Grant.

Room number seven had an iron bedstead, an unpromising mattress, a small wardrobe, a chest of drawers and an unstable-looking table with a Bible and a jug of water on it. The Bible and the water jug looked equally ancient and unused. Grant was thirsty, but Bundanyabba water, even when not contained in jugs like that, was so heavily chlorinated and so hard with natural chemicals that he had always found that drinking it was similar in effect to taking those harsh laxatives the newspaper advertisements were always warning about.

He dropped his suitcases on the bed and went out to find a cafe where he could get something to eat and drink. It was well after ten o’clock and the doors of the hotel bars were pulled to, although not quite shut, which was theBundanyabba method of obeying the law that forbade the sale of liquor after ten o’clock at night and at any time on Sundays.

Grant passed a number of spotty milk-bar cafes which cropped up at fairly regular intervals, emitting uninviting odours of greasy chipped potatoes and milky coffee into the main street.

He began to feel that perhaps a couple of drinks were desirable before eating, and went into the first hotel he came to. It had batwing doors outside the main doors, like most of the hotels in Bundanyabba.These had to be pulled open and the main doors pushed open. Grant carefully pushed the main door to again, in deference to local usage.

It was hard to decide whether it was hotter inside the hotel or out in the street. The island bar was ringed with dense crowds of men and, inside, the hotelkeeper with heavy blue veins bulging from a reddened face, pulled beer with clumsy rapidity, at the same time urging two depressed and wispy barmaids to greater efforts.

‘Men wanting a drink behind you there, Jean. Just a minute, mate, and the girl will serve you. Two schooners? Right! Coming up. Four middies over here, Mary. All right, boys, just a minute and we’ll get to you. Hello there, Jack, what’re you having?’ False good fellowship struggled with satisfiedavarice to make up the expression on his hot, wet, mobile face; and it was even money which was the more successful.

The clang of the cash register rang steadily through the smoke-filled room above the clamour of fifty men all talking loudly and at once.

Knowing it was useless to hope that any of the dozens of hotels in Bundanyabba would be any less crowded, Grant threaded his way through to the bar and managed to obtain a beer from one of the women. He retreated to a corner, took out his cigarettes and found he had no matches.The effort of getting back to the bar to buy a box was too great, and he looked about for someone to ask for a light.

A uniformed policeman was leaning against the wall near him, drinking alone.

‘Could I get a light from you?’ said Grant.

‘Sure,’ said the policeman, dredging in his hip pocket. He came up with a large lighter fitted with an enormous windshield.

‘New to The Yabba?’ he asked, inevitably, holding a great stem of yellow flame to Grant’s cigarette.

Grant concentrated on lighting the cigarette without singeing his nose before answering.

‘Just dropped in for the night,’ he said eventually, ‘flying to Sydney in the morning.’

‘Ah. Come from far?’

‘Tiboonda…I’m the schoolteacher out there.’

‘Oh, the schoolteacher, eh? Let’s see, then, you’re name would be…?’

Grant let him wait a little while then said, ‘Grant.’

‘That’s right. You took over from old Murchison, didn’t you?’

‘McDonald his name was.’

‘That’s right, McDonald. Well what do you know…my name’s Jock Crawford.’ He held out a large hand.

‘John Grant,’ he said. This sort of thing always happened in Bundanyabba. Still, it wouldn’t matter just for that night. This time tomorrow night he would be in Sydney and Bundanyabba would be many miles and six weeks away.

‘Will you have a drink, John?’

‘Er—well yes, thanks.’ It still distressed him a little when people, upon being introduced to him, immediately called him by his first name. Yet everybody he had ever met in the west did just that.

A lane through the crowd formed automatically for the policeman and he was served promptly by the hotelkeeper himself. He was back in less than two minutes.

‘Do you like the Huntleigh beer, John?’

‘Yes. It seems all right. Is it my imagination or is it a bitstrong?’ It was a worn subject, but one Bundanyabba people loved.

‘It’s got a hell of a kick. You want to watch it if you’re not used to it. They have to put a lot of arsenic in it to preserve it on the way up here.’

Grant looked at the beer sceptically.

‘Arsenic?’

‘So they say.’

‘Mmm. What time do the pubs close here?’ He knew the answer, but he was curious about the police view of the trading hours.

‘When the crowd goes home. Sometimes midnight, sometimes they don’t close at all…pay nights that is, mostly.’

‘The police don’t worry about it?’

‘No. What’s the use. Long as they keep the doors shut and don’t make too much row we don’t bother about them. If we did close ‘em at ten there’d only be a lot of sly grog shops spring up.’

It struck Grant that this was a curious conversation to be having with a constable who was drinking in a hotel while in uniform. Fairly obviously the police were reasonably tolerant. There was nothing to be gained in labouring the point.

‘Yes. Well. Um. Will you have another drink?’

‘Yeah. Sure.’

Grant made to take the policeman’s glass.

‘Here, give us your dough. I’ll get ‘em quicker than you.’

Grant submissively handed over a ten-shilling note and the policeman was again back in two minutes with the beer. He gave Grant his change.

‘You’ve finished work for the day?’ said Grant.

‘Just started. I’m on the hotel beat. Been on it all this week so far. It’s pretty good, y’know; I don’t pay for any of the beer I drink.’

Grant didn’t quite know how to react, so he just said: ‘Don’t you?’

‘I could get yours free too, but it’d be making it a bit thick, wouldn’t it.’

‘Yes…yes of course.’

‘We do the pubs a bit of good one way and another, y’know,’ said the policeman, by way of justification, Grant presumed.

He felt himself beginning to expand under the influence of the beer. He hadn’t eaten for ten hours. The heat in the bar was pressing less heavily upon him; the noise no longer crashed into his brain, but beat more remotely around him.

He looked into the raw, freckled face of the policeman.

‘Been in The Yabba long, Jock?’ he said, luxuriating a little in his faint irony.

‘All m’life, John.’

‘Ever think of leaving?’

‘Leaving The Yabba? Not on your life. Best little town in the world this is.’

‘Ever been anywhere else?’

‘Did three months’ training in the city. Didn’t like it.’

Grant suddenly realised his private joke was not particularly good. He drained his glass.

‘I’d better get along,’ he said, ‘haven’t eaten yet.’

‘Have another one before you go.’

‘No thanks, I won’t. It’s a bit much on an empty stomach.’

‘Go on, won’t do you any harm.’The policeman winked heavily: ‘It’s on the house.’

Why not? thought Grant. It would be hard enough to sleep on that bed, anyway. He handed his glass to the policeman who again went through his crowd-penetrating routine.

‘We’ll just have this round here and we’ll go along to the next pub. I’ve got to look in on them all tonight,’ said the policeman when he came back.

Grant wondered what the incidence was of diseased liver among members of the Bundanyabba police force.

‘I won’t be drinking any more, thanks, Jock. I’ll have to eat,’ he said, realising nevertheless that he had been put in the position of having to complete the round.

The policeman seemed content with that and addressed himself to his beer.

Soon he said: ‘Where are you going to eat?’

‘I don’t know. Where’s a good place?’

‘The Two-up school’s pretty good if you want a good steak.’

Grant, like every Australian, had heard of Two-up schools. Every city has one and in the outback, miners, labourers, rail-waymen, anybody desperate for diversion—and that is almost everybody—will gather from a radius of a hundred miles to wager on the fall of the illegal pennies.

‘They serve meals at the Two-up school, do they?’ he asked.

‘Best in town,’ said the policeman, with the proprietorial pride which all Bundanyabba people evinced when they spoke of the city’s excesses.

‘Where is the place?’

‘Just around the corner from the main street, I’ll take you round there in a minute.’

Grant wondered whether free bets were allowed the police in Bundanyabba, but he did not raise the point with Crawford. He was beginning to like the policeman and, dimly, he was aware that this was a strong indication that he had drunk too much.

Crawford had finished his beer and was fiddling expectantly with the glass.

‘A couple more?’ said Grant, because he didn’t know how to avoid it. He handed over the money and Crawford went for the beer. He took a little longer this time and when he came back he said, ‘I slung your change to the girl…told her it was yours…do you a bit of good when you come in again.’

Grant could have pointed out that it was not at all likely that he would ever come in here again, and even less likely that the barmaid would remember him if he did; but he said nothing. He was smoking one cigarette after another now, as men do when they are drinking.

‘Police have much to do in Bundanyabba?’ he asked without really caring much whether they did or not.

‘No, John, no; on the whole, no! We just keep an eye on things.’ Crawford became a shade ponderous as he spoke in a semi-official capacity.

‘Not much crime?’

‘Almost none at all, John, nothing serious anyway. About the honestest town in Australia this is.’

‘So?’ Grant strove to look impressed.

Crawford rather spoiled the effect of his declaration by adding: ‘’Course no one’s really game to try anything because we’d get ’em so quickly.’

‘So?’

‘It’s so isolated, see? You can’t get out of the place in a hurry without everybody knowing about it.’

‘No. I suppose not.Then it’s a pretty easy life for you?’

‘It’s pretty good,’ said Crawford.‘’Course we do have quite a few suicides…they’re a bit of trouble.’

Grant remembered having heard something of the suicide rate in Bundanyabba and the local custom of declaring the most blatant acts of self-destruction ‘accidental death’. He asked the policeman why.

‘Well,’ said the policeman thoughtfully, ‘I suppose it’s because so many suicides give the place a bad name.’

Grant had heard another story about Bundanyabba to the effect that the local authorities kept the official thermometer on the lawn in front of the Town Hall. When the temperature rose above one hundred degrees in the shade, the lawn sprinklers were turned on to cool the thermometer down. In this way Bundanyabba’s official maximum temperature seldom rose above one hundred degrees.

There was, reflected Grant, possibly some connection between the official attitudes towards suicide and high temperatures, although he was inclined to disbelieve the story about the thermometer.

Anyhow, the whole thing was far too complicated topursue at this stage of the evening.

‘I really must go and eat, I’m afraid,’ he said.

‘Have another before you go?’

‘No. No really, I’ve had enough, thanks; I’ll pass out if I don’t eat soon.’

‘Easy seen you’re not a Yabba-man, John,’ said the policeman. ‘Come and I’ll take you round to the School.’ The School, Grant realised, was another name for the Two-up game. More commonly still it was simply referred to as ‘the Game’.

The noise of the bar dropped away as though they had shed something tangible when they stepped out into the main street. Grant tried to count the number of beers he had drunk, but found he couldn’t. ‘Fresh’ would have been a gross misnomer for the air in the main street, but it was different from the air in the bar and Grant felt its effect.

He looked affectionately at Crawford. A character, that’s what Crawford was, a fascinating chunk of local colour. He, John Grant, was savouring him to while away the time, making an erudite little study of Bundanyabba man. Grant stumbled slightly stepping from the footpath to the road.

Crawford led him a couple of blocks down the main street, talking at length on the features of life in Bundanyabba. Grant wondered whether Bundanyabba people talked as muchamong themselves as they did to strangers about the virtues of their city. He had the impression that they did, the city seemed to be an obsession with them. Yabba-Men—wasn’t yabba Aboriginal for talk? That seemed to be the basis for a pun, but he could not tie the threads of the thought together.

Crawford turned into one of the main cross-streets and a few yards down they entered a long dark lane. The lane ran parallel with the main street, and on one side Grant could see the backs of the business premises and shops silhouetted against the sky. On the other side were the tall paling fences bordering the backyards of people’s homes.

There were no lights in the lane, and the buildings threw a dark shadow so that up to a foot or so above head level all was complete darkness. Grant became aware of many figures in the darkness.Twenty or so men were standing about in the lane, talking in low voices. Cigarettes glowed orange and then dimmed as men smoked, and often a match would flare briefly yellow. As his eyes became accustomed to the darkness, Grant saw that he and Crawford were attracting mild attention.

‘How goes it, Jock?’ a voice would drift from knots of men.

‘Not bad, Jim, how’s it?’ Crawford would reply, identifying people by their voices as far as Grant could make out, because he could not distinguish the features on a single face.

They came to a gate where two men were standing withthe nonchalance only adopted by men standing guard.

‘G’night, Jock,’ they said, as Crawford and Grant drew near. Grant could see they were looking at him as piercingly as one could look piercing through almost complete darkness.

‘This is a mate of mine, John Grant,’ said Crawford. ‘You can let him in any time, he’s all right.’

The two men grunted, and Grant and Crawford went through the gate into what seemed to be a yard at the back of a shop-building. Grant wondered why such care should be taken to guard an establishment which was so obviously tolerated by the police.

As if answering him Crawford said, ‘They won’t let you in unless they know you.They’ve had a lot of trouble with newspaper blokes. They come out here every now and then and write the place up—you know, sort of make a fuss about the gambling and the drinking.Then we’ve got to shut the Game down for a while and make the pubs close at ten.’

Crawford paused a moment, then added bitterly: ‘They’re a bloody nuisance, I can tell you.’

They passed through the yard into a large room fitted with wooden benches and plank seats. A number of men were sitting at the benches eating. One side of the room was fitted out like a hamburger stall. Two men in open-necked shirts were cooking steaks on the stove.

Crawford went up to the counter and said, ‘Fix a steak for me mate, Joe.’

One of the men said, ‘G’day, Jock,’ and slapped another steak down on the grilling plate.

‘That’ll cost you six bob,’ said Crawford, ‘and it’ll be the best six bob’s worth you ever had.’

Grant wondered whether the organisers of the Game leased the catering rights, or simply provided the restaurant as part of the general organisation. Crawford’s enthusiasm for the meals served would have suggested that he had some interest in the business if Grant had not known that Bundanyabba people were all proud of the Game. Presumably this pride extended to the facilities.

Through a door at the other end of the room Grant could see about a hundred men crowded around an open space in which two men were conferring. That undoubtedly would be the famous Game.

‘Come and I’ll show you inside while you’re waiting,’ said Crawford.

The section where the Game was in progress had probably once been a large storeroom. In the centre was a patch of green carpet about ten feet square. This was edged by a wooden bench about nine inches high, which was crowded with players.

Behind them, thrusting between their shoulders, squatting and standing, rising in tiers of humanity until they reached the side walls, were the rest of the players. Now that he could see the whole room Grant guessed there must have been about three hundred men in there. They were all dressed in belted trousers with open-necked shirts, except for a few with only singlets over their torsos. Grant felt a little conspicuous in his safari jacket.

In the centre of the carpet square were the two men whom Grant had seen conferring.They were both big, gaunt, rapacious-looking; quite obviously the controllers of the Game. With them was a small nondescript man holding a slip of wood in his hand. Grant saw him drop a bundle of notes to the ground at his feet.

‘You know about the Game?’ asked Crawford.

‘Only vaguely,’ said Grant.

‘Well that bloke with the kip is the spinner.’

‘Oh?’ said Grant.

‘He’s dropped fifty quid in the centre. That’s got to be covered before they’ll let him spin.’

Various players around the square were throwing notes on to the carpet.The controllers were gathering them up.Then one called out: ‘He’s set!’

‘That means the fifty quid in the centre’s covered,’ saidCrawford. ‘Now all the others can have their side-bets.’

Around the square, men were dropping little piles of notes and crying out: ‘Ten quid tails,’ or ‘Five heads,’ or ‘Ten bob tails,’ or ‘Twenty quid tails,’ according to their purses or ambitions.

As soon as the money hit the ground, other men dropped bundles the same size on top of it, declaring their intention to bet on the opposite side of the coins.

To Grant, who was none too clear-headed anyway, it seemed that money was being sprayed light-heartedly in all directions for no apparent reason.There must have been more than a thousand pounds on the carpet.

But there was nothing light-hearted about the faces of the players.They were intent, set, calculating.The whole business was transacted in terms of fairly subdued calls, except when some gambler, unable to get his stake covered, would shout to attract the attention of players on the other side of the ring.

Soon everybody settled down and a quiet fell on the room. One of the controllers said, ‘All set?’ and looked around.There were no objections, so he produced two pennies and placed them carefully on the slip of wood the nondescript man was holding.

The controller stood back.

‘Right,’ he said. ‘Spin ’em!’

The man flipped the piece of wood and the coins spun upinto the air above his head and dropped down on to the carpet.

There was silence.

The controllers went over and inspected the coins.

‘Tails!’

Immediately activity burst out in the room as players dived at the pile of notes around the ring, extracting their winnings. Piles of perhaps two hundred pounds were rapidly divided by the simple process of each man taking what was due to him.

‘Get the idea, John?’ said Crawford.

‘More or less—they just bet on whether the pennies will come down heads or tails, is that it?’

‘That’s it.’

‘But what’s all this business on the sides about?’

‘Well, once the spinner’s bet is covered anyone can have a bet on the side.’

‘Then how does the School make a profit?’

‘They take a cut from the spinner, and if any of the side blokes have a big win they’re expected to sling a bit.’

The division of money was complete now and the School was settling down for the next spin.

‘You’d think,’ said Grant, ‘that everybody’d be at each other’s throats when they settle, it all seems pretty confused.’

‘Hardly ever been a fight in the place. Everybody knows what he’s got coming out of the ring, and he takes it—simple as that. ‘Course it probably wouldn’t work anywhere except in The Yabba. All these blokes know each other, y’know.’

The pennies were spinning in the air again.

‘Tails!’ and again the scramble for winnings.The man with the kip was stolidly surveying the mass of notes at his feet. He looked as though he was wading in money, thought Grant.

‘When does he stop spinning?’ he asked Crawford.

‘When he likes, or when he throws heads—that means he loses the lot.’

‘Does he have to leave all his money in?’

‘No, he’s only got to have a quid in the centre.’

The spinner threw tails again, and Grant calculated that he must now have four hundred pounds in front of him. Grant pushed forward, fascinated by the profusion of crumpled notes.

The coins flashed in the air once more.

Again the tails, and this time the spinner tossed down the kip and began to shovel the notes into his pockets. He had turned fifty pounds into eight hundred in less than a quarter of an hour. He picked up the last fistful of notes and thrust them into the hands of one of the controllers, walked out ofthe ring with unmoved countenance, pushed through the crowd and disappeared out of the door.

‘That was Charlie Jones,’ said Crawford. ‘He comes in every pay day with fifty quid and throws until he has eight hundred quid or nothing.’

‘Does he win or lose in the long run?’

‘He pulls out the eight hundred about once every six weeks.’ Crawford added as though in explanation: ‘He’s only got to throw four tails in a row to get that, y’know.’

‘Very nice.’

Another player had taken the kip and laid out an investment of one pound.

Grant said: ‘My steak’s probably ready.’

‘Yes, come on.’

They went back into the eating room and collected Grant’s steak.

‘I’ll have to be pushing off,’ said Crawford, after paternally seeing Grant to a seat at one of the benches.

‘All right, Jock, thanks for showing me around.’ Grant was glad to see the end of the policeman now.

They shook hands and Crawford said: ‘See you ’round,’ and went out into the night.

The steak, Grant found, justified none of the claims Crawford had made for it. It was stringy and grossly overcooked,and Grant suspected that it would have tasted slightly ‘off’ if it had not tasted so overwhelmingly of burnt leather.

Nevertheless he felt much more clear-headed when he had eaten it, and the accompanying pile of soggy potato chips, and drunk the coffee which tasted, and looked like, milk which had been diluted with water, discoloured with some brown substance, and heated. The fare at the Two-up school was not, he decided, of the same standard as the entertainment, but probably was better than the average meal served in outback cafes.

He looked at his watch. It was eleven-thirty. His aircraft left for the east at eleven-thirty. He had twelve hours to fill in.

He made a pretence, for his own benefit, of considering what he would do now—go to bed, drink some more, go for a stroll. But he knew quite well that he intended to go back and watch the Game. He had been more interested in the spectacle than he cared to admit; moreover, an as yet bloodless phantom of intention was flitting about the darker recesses of his mind and he was pretending he could not see it.

In the playing room yet another man in the ring had built an imposing collection of notes about his feet. He lost the lot in a moment when the pennies fell with tails to the carpet.

Grant stayed against one of the walls, watching intentlythe method of betting. His thoughts were running to the odds involved in heads or tails being thrown four times in succession, and he was very aware of the notes in his wallet.

Normally he seldom gambled, because opportunity seldom arose. But now he could feel in himself an emotion that was completely new to him—the strange passion that gamblers know.

‘It would not matter a great deal,’ he told himself, ‘if I lost the seventeen pounds or so I have in cash—and I might win.’

Deliberately he evoked the phantom, calling it into the light, recognised it as intention and gave it the authority of his will.

He took a five-pound note from his wallet.

The prospect of actually laying the bet produced a sense of diffidence, and he moved vaguely forward through the crowd with the note in his hand. Just in front of him, on the edge of the ring, a man had about a hundred pounds at his feet and was crying:‘Come on, another fifty wanted on tails. Anybody betting tails?’

Grant stood indecisively. He felt gauche among these confident gamblers and could not quite bring himself to lean forward and drop his five pounds on to the floor. Besides, he was not at all convinced of the infallibility of the system of distribution of winnings.

The note was snatched from his fingers.

‘On tails, mate?’ said a seedy-looking character who was standing directly behind the man calling for business.

Grant nodded because he could not think of anything else to do, and saw his five-pound note flutter to the floor.

Presently the controller called: ‘All set?’ and the coins were spun.

‘Tails!’ And Grant found himself pushed aside as players pressed forward to collect their winnings. He attempted to struggle forward himself, but could not summon the self-confidence required. Soon all was ready for the next spin, and Grant was crushed back against the wall, with no idea of the whereabouts of the man with whom he had laid his bet.

So much, he thought, for each man taking his due. He looked around angrily for someone from whom to claim his money, but with no real hope.Then he saw the seedy-looking character jumping up and down, trying to look over the heads of the crowd.

He was saying loudly: ‘Anybody seen a tall bloke with a coat on? Anybody seen a tall fair sort of bloke with a coat on?’

Grant waved at him energetically and he came weaving through the players.

‘There y’are, mate,’ he said. ‘Thought I’d lost ye.’ He handed Grant two five-pound notes and began worming his way backto the ringside without waiting for an answer.

Grant looked ashamedly at the money and gestured remote thanks to the man who had rescued it. He was putting the money in his wallet when he experienced an entirely new emotion—the remorse of a gambler who has not put all his money on a successful wager.

He paused with the money halfway into his wallet. He had twenty-two pounds ten shillings.Twice that was fifty pounds. Twice fifty was a hundred. Twice a hundred…

Confident now, he thrust through the crowd and even managed to squeeze himself on to the bench at the ringside. He took all his money from his wallet and held it in his hand, waiting for the completion of the present spin.

He gave no thought to whether he should bet heads or tails. He was out to win money on pure chance, and he knew that chance was not governed by whim.

When the time came he dropped his twenty-two pounds ten to the floor and called out: ‘Twenty-two pounds ten on tails.’ He chose tails simply because the man next to him was calling for bets on heads.

Immediately someone dropped a bundle of notes on to Grant’s pile.

‘Twenty-two ten on heads,’ said a voice above him, adding conversationally: ‘There’s twenty-three there, mate.’ Only thendid Grant realise that the odd ten shillings was slightly out of place.

Again Grant’s mood changed. He felt quite withdrawn. His bet had been made, in a few moments he would have fifty pounds or nothing. He could not change his mind now. Nevertheless he kept repeating to himself: ‘It does not matter if you lose. It’s a chance you’re taking. It does not matter if you lose.’And by some instinct he could not analyse he kept his eyes tight shut with his head hanging low so that he might not be seen by the casual gambler whose money lay before him.

And his eyes were still shut when he heard the call of ‘Tails.’

I have fifty pounds, thought Grant, and turned to give his opponent his ten shillings change. But nobody behind him gave any indication of having had anything to do with the bet. A matter of ten shillings was of inconsiderable moment at the Game.

His money was still at his feet.

‘Leaving all that on tails, mate?’ said a voice above his head.

In one convolution of his mind he considered the matter, decided for it and said ‘Yes.’ In the next convolution of his mind he thought: Oh God, why didn’t I take some of it out at least?

But the wad of notes had dropped swiftly from above and he had one hundred pounds before him.

Now he didn’t give a damn what he looked like. His hands trembled grossly as he lit a cigarette and drew the smoke deep into his lungs with sucking breath.

He became terribly aware of the smoky room, the heat that gave the impression it could be shovelled away, the sweating tense faces of the gamblers, the insouciant greed of the controllers; and then the pennies were spinning, higher, higher, turning in a double arc, small brown discs of fortune: and down they plummeted.

‘My God!’ said Grant aloud. ‘It’s tails.’

He looked at his money, lying there all green and crumpled, and leaned forward to gather it up. And in the very act of leaning forward he experienced his third strange emotion that night—the mysticism of gamblers. He knew the pennies would fall tails again. He knew that as surely as he knew that he existed. All that was required was the will to act on his conviction and he summoned that very easily.

He sat upright again, leaving his money where it was and cried: ‘One hundred pounds on tails!’

Three different gamblers contributed to cover Grant’s money. He sat back on the bench and looked around while the other bets were made. He was not thinking; he waspossessed with foreknowledge, and while that strange devil spoke Grant would not even contemplate his own actions.

He almost felt doubt when the pennies described their arc and began to fall, but there was not time for doubt to crystallise before the controller called: ‘And it’s tails again!’

The reaction struck Grant hard in the stomach. For a moment he felt as though he would faint across his winnings. Then he leaned forward and began cramming the notes into his pockets.

He did not think of throwing a tip to the controllers, and they apparently had not noticed his win, for they demanded nothing. He pushed through the crowd, holding his hands on the money in his jacket pockets, almost staggered outside into the dining room, the rear yard, the lane among the shadows of the loiterers, even more ghostly now that his eyes were unaccustomed to the dark, and then he was in the street.

His whole body sang with the exultation of his soul. He had won almost two hundred pounds. His seventeen pounds ten had become two hundred pounds.

The words ‘two hundred pounds’ kept on being repeated in his mind. ‘Two hundred pounds.Two hundred pounds.TwoHUNDREDpounds. Unbelievable.TWO HUNDRED POUNDS!’

And he had his wages cheque intact in his pocket.

He had never had so much money in his life before, andnow he could feel it swelling his pockets, making his clothes bulge, rustling when he walked.

He had to get somewhere where he could count it, look at it.

He never remembered the time he spent going back to his hotel room except for the moment when he fumbled for his key, and that was only because he had to rummage among the notes that jammed his pockets.

In his room he emptied the money out on to the floor and carefully counted it, laying the notes out on the floor in order of denomination. Then he took out his pay cheque and laid it alongside them.

Two hundred pounds in notes and a cheque for one hundred and forty pounds.Three hundred and forty pounds and tomorrow he would be in Sydney.

He looked into the mirror and saw his face, young and still taut, sweat-streaked; and his eyes glittering with the stimulus of winning money; his straight hair rumpled where he had been running his fingers through it.

‘Grant,’ he said to his image, ‘you’re a clever lad.’

He flung himself on his back on the bed, and stared at the ceiling, tingling with the joy of it all.

For the first time in a long while he thought about Robyn, and laughed at himself for supposing that two hundredpounds would make her any more accessible. Robyn of the long blonde hair, bound in plaits around her head. Robyn, confident and assured and remote. Robyn as he had last seen her a year ago, a week before he left for Tiboonda, standing at the gate in front of her home with the light behind her, making her hair shine.

Robyn, who had shown singularly little interest in John Grant. But, ah God! she was a lovely girl.

Could he not now, at this moment, put through a long-distance call to her, telling her he was coming home, that he was rich? But then Robyn was more used to money than he, and might not be so impressed at the idea of three hundred and forty pounds.

He laughed and leaped up and began to undress, and then stopped, stunned by the enormity of a thought.

If he had let his bet stand…and if tails had been thrown just once more…he would never have had to return to Tiboonda. He would have won four hundred pounds. Four hundred pounds and his wages cheque would have paid off the Education Department bond and left him enough to live on while he sought work in Sydney.

One twist of the coins. Five seconds of time and he would have been saved a whole year in Tiboonda. Would have been…could still be…

He sat down on the bed and looked at the money. It was wonderful, but what did it offer apart from a few glorious weeks in Sydney. He could have that anyway, with his wages. And if he lost the whole two hundred pounds he would be no worse off than if he had lost the original twenty-two pounds ten.

But if he won, tomorrow he would be in Sydney to stay.

He argued with himself for several minutes, pointing out in exact terms why the risk was worth taking, and, in due course, he convinced himself.

He looked at his face in the mirror. The glitter had gone from his eyes, but the tautness of his skin had increased. Slowly he stood up, put his jacket on, packed the money into neat bundles and slipped them into his pocket, put the cheque back in his wallet, looked once more in the mirror and grinned briefly at his preoccupied face, and went back to the Two-up school.

They let him in at the gate without query and he went straight through into the betting room. The crowd did not seem to have changed; if anything the room was hotter than before and the smoke heavier.

Grant felt more or less calm. He was no longer exhilarated by the idea of gambling. He knew that he had an even chance of getting what he wanted, and he was going to take that chance.

He spent about five minutes working his way back to the ringside, and, as he pushed gently forward, he determined that he would bet on heads this time.

A space on the bench was vacated by a man who seemed to have won a fortune, and Grant sat down.

The controller walked over to the player next to Grant and offered him the kip. It was the custom in the Bundan-yabba Game that the pennies should be spun in order of place by betters on the ringside bench.

The player shook his head, and the controller offered the kip to Grant.

For the rest of his life he was to remember the impulse that moved him to take it and follow the controller to the centre of the ring.

Normally he would have been embarrassed at being the centre of activity, but he knew the attention of everyone in the room was on the pennies and not on the spinner.

‘How much?’ said the controller.

Grant had no intention of prolonging his ordeal—a fifty-fifty chance was a fifty-fifty chance, and held as validly for one toss as for several.

‘Two hundred,’ he said, and drew the money from his pockets.

The controller counted it perfunctorily.

‘Two hundred,’ he called, and notes came in from around the ring.

Grant stood slackly with the kip in his hand.

‘Centre’s set,’ said the controller, and the side-betting began.

Grant felt himself surrounded by money, but it all seemed a long way off except for the pile of four hundred pounds that he could touch with the toe of his shoe.

‘All set?’ called the controller.

The voices were quiet.

‘Right! Spin ’em!’

Inexpertly, Grant jerked the coins into the air.

A moment of spiritual darkness.

Then the controller called: ‘They’re split!’ and picked up the coins.

Grant did not know what this meant, and it was not until the controller was settling the coins on the kip again that he realised he had thrown one head and one tail, and that counted for nothing.

It occurred to him now that his decision to bet on heads had miscarried—as spinner he had to bet on tails. But he had no time to think about that because again the controller was ordering him to spin, and again he jerked the coins.

Two tails facing upwards from the floor—two tails—four hundred pounds; but like a harsh noise breaking through apleasant dream the controller was saying: ‘No throw! Bets off. No throw! Hold on to your money!’

The controller picked up the pennies and put them back on the kip in Grant’s shaking hand.

‘Throw ’em above your head, mate.’

Unnerved now, Grant jerked the pennies again. He tried to follow their flight, but lost them against the glare of the electric lamp.

Where were they?

There was a scramble at his feet, and the notes, the four hundred pounds had gone, and the controller had called heads and Grant was walking out of the ring and he hadn’t even seen the pennies fall.

A humming numbness gripped his body and he was afraid that the other gamblers would see his deterioration. The muscles of his face were so taut he felt he must be grimacing wildly, and surely his cheeks were twitching. He leaned against a wall and smoked quickly, trying to laugh at himself, cursing himself, wishing he’d never come near the place, telling himself to get out of here now, because there was still danger. With that part of his mind that was independent of physical disturbance he repeated the words: It doesn’t matter. You’ve only lost twenty-two pounds ten. You took the risk, and it didn’t come off. You realised that before you took the risk.You are now no worse off than you would have been if you’d lost the twenty-odd pounds in the first place.

But he was not convinced. A minute before he had had two hundred pounds. Now he did not have two hundred pounds. Useless to say he had won it as quickly as he had lost it. He was dry, shaken, sickened by the anticlimax.

The absolute unconcern of those around him struck him as wantonly callous, but a little corner of humour left to him dispelled the twinge of self-pity, and he grinned as he thought of his lack of concern for the loser when he had won.

All right, Grant, he told himself, you’ve had your run. Go back to bed and forget it ever happened.

But he stayed leaning against the wall saturated in the atmosphere of money. It had been so easy to win. Just a flicker of two coins and money doubled itself, and doubled itself and doubled itself. God! but the hunger for money was a gnawing, tearing thing.

He barely recognised Crawford when he appeared and said: ‘How’s it, John, still here?’

Grant had no reserves left for social efforts.

‘Will they cash a cheque here?’ he said. No, he would not think about it, he would do it. He would do it. Act now and think about it later, but act now.

‘Yes,’ said Crawford, unsurprised. ‘How much for?’

‘One hundred and forty.’ Grant took out the cheque and showed it to Crawford.

‘That’ll be all right, I’ll fix it. You’d better sign it.’

Grant endorsed the cheque with a pen supplied by Crawford, and the policeman made his way over to the controllers, who cashed the cheque without question, carelessly doling the notes out of their pockets.

Grant barely thanked Crawford when he brought him the money.

‘Going to try the Game?’ said Crawford, but Grant had forgotten him, and he was on his way to the ringside.

His lips were working in desperation. Somewhere in his mind the irrationality of his actions was clear to him; but he was like an automaton, dominated by an idea that was almost an instruction. He was being forced forward by a decision, made, it seemed now, forever ago.

Not for Grant the tedium of trying to build a bank from a small bet. He leaned over the line of players sitting on the benches, dropped his one hundred and forty pounds and called: ‘One forty on tails.’

His voice sounded strange and removed, and despair was heavy on his shoulders, and dragging down on his stomach. He had no hope of winning, but he would not have recalled his bet even if there had been time before it wascovered by showers of notes from half a dozen different directions.

Just three minutes after he had received the money for his cheque, he had lost it.

The cry of ‘Heads!’ had no effect on him; but a moment or two later there was the dull, bruising shock of realisation. He watched blankly as the hands scraped away the money he had laid down. He kept on looking at the bare carpet where it had been, until suddenly another growth of notes flowered there, and the Game was going on.

He turned, staring, and walked out of the building, out into the night, walking rigidly, transfixed by the magnitude of his loss. What the loss meant to him was so grievous in import that he could not think about it. His mind had a small tight knot at the back, and around it whirled the destructive realisation of what he had done, but until that knot unravelled, he need not think too deeply about what was to happen now.

He went back to the hotel, stripped off his clothes, fell naked on to the bed, and stared, hot-eyed, at the ceiling until suddenly he fell asleep with the light still burning.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

[2]

He thought of Robyn and the short white dress she wore at tennis; and the way a wave could curl in foam at the top and still maintain the deep, green sweep of its curving, moving shape: and then, Oh God! he was awake on an iron bed in a hotel in Bundanyabba and he had no money.

Grant rolled off the bed, looked hastily away from the grey face in the mirror and, still naked, walked to the window. He looked out without seeing the mean hotel yard and the paling fences of the backyards of the neighbouring shops. It was not long after dawn and already the smothering heat of the night had given way to the harsher, burning glare of the sun.

Grant turned and leaned his back against the paper-coveredwooden wall, trying to draw an element of coolness from it. He took the jug of water from the table and poured a little on his head, letting it trickle, lukewarm, down his body.

‘There is no point,’ he said aloud, ‘in being hopeless and helpless.’

But words did not help much to allay the mass of self-condemnation that was bursting inside him.

He sat down on the bed and looked at himself in the mirror. A dark spread of beard had appeared on his face; his hair was plastered down with the water; a little sweat had already gathered on his chest and forehead.

He attempted a smile, and saw his lips respond; but his eyes remained dull and hollow.

‘Life,’ he said, again aloud, ‘will appear brighter after break-fast.’

He lay back on the bed again, and almost succeeded in sleeping until a hotel bell indicated that it was time to shower, shave, and dress to present some sort of face to a world that had suddenly become unduly complicated.

Breakfast was surprisingly good, largely because somebody in the hotel had had the enterprise to include chilled pawpaw in the menu.That stayed thought a little, then the milky coffee and the first cigarette of the day.

The first cigarette, the first of eleven that were left in hislast packet, and all that a search of his pockets had produced was two shillings and sevenpence. He felt he should eat all the hotel offered, because at best there seemed little chance that he would eat again that day, but the heat was dragging at his being and his mouth was raw from the constant smoking last night, so he ate only the pawpaw.

He ordered a second cup of coffee and began another cigarette because eleven would not last long anyway.

There were few people in the dining room and he had a table to himself, so with the second cigarette there came the time when the situation had to be considered.

All right, now it had to be faced: what was he to do?

He had nobody he could borrow money from, certainly nobody to whom he could explain that he had lost all his money gambling.

And in any case, how much did he need to borrow? Just to stay alive until his next pay cheque was due would cost at least a hundred pounds.

If he got to Sydney there was just a chance that he could spend elongated periods with somewhat dim relatives, but what a chance with two and sevenpence to spread over six weeks.

And in any case, how to get to Sydney? The train fare one way would be about ten pounds even if he felt like facing aforty-hour journey without any money for food. And when he arrived in Sydney would he walk with his suitcases to his uncle’s home fifteen miles out in the suburbs?

Quite apart from which, it was all academic, because he did not have ten pounds.

Could he sell anything? Only his clothes, and there did not seem much of a market for second-hand clothes in Bundanyabba. His watch was battered and old and worth a few shillings at the most, and besides he knew of nothing that approached a pawnshop in the city.

The only possibility seemed to be to find some sort of work in Bundanyabba. If he could find a job in a shop, or an office, or labouring—anything to raise the fare to Sydney.

But where to stay in the meantime? He could not get work until Monday at the earliest, and he could not stay in the hotel because the bill would come to more than he would be paid.

The contrast between what lay before him now and what he had planned the night before swept across him with physical violence, but he jammed his thoughts back to the immediate problems.

Obviously he had to get out of the hotel at once. That at least was a definite move. He went upstairs, collected his bags, glanced once around the room to make sure that hehad left nothing and went downstairs again to the reception desk.

An odd sense of gratitude caught him when the girl gave him back his ten shillings deposit on the keys. He had forgotten that. And then he looked at the small, orange-tinted note and remembered the great wads of money he had lost last night. He thrust the note into his pocket with the two and sevenpence and walked out into the street with his suitcases.

It was nine o’clock on Saturday morning.

The sun hurt his eyes more than usually, and he put his sunglasses on. He turned into the main street and walked slowly down the footpath under the dilapidated awnings, past the Town Hall with its rare and nurtured patch of green grass on the front garden.

When he came to the corner by the Post Office he turned around and walked back along the block again.

Where in the name of God was he to go?

He felt conspicuous, although there was no reason why anybody in that busy street should think anything but that he was waiting for a bus. He put his cases down by a bus stop under the shade of an awning and sat on one of them.

There must be an answer to this. He could not just wander up and down until he collapsed. Although, of course, he could do just that.

From where he was sitting he could see the great piles of mullock and waste from the mines, artificial hills within a few hundred yards of the centre of the city. When the wind blew, thick clouds of dust drifted off the mullock and fell in a blinding cloud over the streets.

Grant looked at the barren heaps of worked-out earth as possibly being where he would spend the nights for the next six weeks.

Presumably there were soup kitchens in Bundanyabba, he thought, a shade desperately.

He smoked another of his cigarettes while he sat there; then the bus came and went and Grant, convinced now that he was drawing attention, stood up again and walked the length of the shopping centre with his suitcases.

By half past nine he could feel something like nervous hysteria mounting in his throat. He had to find somewhere to put his suitcases and think for a while.

The sun had raised the shade temperature to just on a hundred degrees already, and the tar in the roadway was bubbling.

Grant felt himself exposed in no-man’s-land. There was no avenue of retreat and the enemy was invisible and unassailable. His supports had been dissipated, his arms were lost. He could not even burrow into the ground to hide.

A lone figure, not worth a burst of machine-gun fire, he seemed doomed to wander the desolate terrain until he just dropped into oblivion.

Damn it all! He couldn’t just walk up and down the street for six mortal weeks.

He turned into the bar of the nearest hotel.

There were only about thirty men in the bar, taking their first drinks after breakfast, and Grant easily found a corner to stow his suitcases.

He ordered a pony of beer—the smallest amount sold. It cost him ninepence, but it bought respite from the street. He put it down on the bar untouched, determined it would serve as an excuse to stay in the bar as long as he liked.

Eight cigarettes left, and the one he was going to smoke now meant seven left. Strange that cigarettes should be so much more desirable when the supply was strictly limited.

He leaned on the brown bar top and looked up at the rows and rows of pennies and threepences stuck to the wooden skirting above his head. It was a local custom to wet small coins with beer and stick them to the woodwork. They amounted to several pounds before they filled all the available space above the bar.Then they were taken away and the whole process began again.

It was generally supposed that the publicans gave themoney to charity, but Grant had never seen any evidence to support this supposition.

He estimated that there must have been ten or twelve pounds stuck up there, enough to get him to Sydney. However, there would no doubt be determined resistance to any move on his part to acquire the coins.

He sipped his beer prudently and rolled cigarette smoke around in his mouth, letting it trickle out slowly so that he could breathe it in again through his nose. Which, he pointed out to himself, was no advance at all towards the solution of his situation.

A little man with glasses came to the bar beside him and called for a middy of beer in what seemed to be the remnants of an Irish accent. He took off his panama hat, revealing a head almost completely bald except for small white tufts around the ears.

‘Hot!’ he said to Grant pleasantly, running a huge handkerchief over his glistening pate to support his statement.

‘Hot,’ agreed Grant, curtly.

The little man looked around the bar, but apparently saw nobody he knew and turned his attention back to Grant.

‘New to The Yabba?’

Grant shrank a little—was everybody in Bundanyabba cast in the identical conversational mould?

‘New to The Yabba,’ he said so casually as to be rude, but rudeness of this type was unknown in Bundanyabba and the little man did not recognise it.

‘Like the old place?’

At least, thought Grant, a new tack could be introduced at this point.

‘No! I think it’s bloody awful,’ and that, he hoped would stifle any further approaches.

The little man paused with his beer halfway to his mouth.

‘You don’t like The Yabba?’This was the nearest thing to heresy he had heard in many a year and he did not quite know how to deal with it.

‘No.’

The little man drank his middy without drawing breath and called for another. He seemed to ponder for a moment, then turned to Grant again and said:

‘Will you have a drink?’ It was as though Grant had done something unmentionable, but not quite sufficient to put him beyond the social pale.

‘No. I’m just toying with this one, thanks.’

‘Well drink it down and I’ll buy you another.’

This had gone far enough. Grant had no desire to cultivate this baldingémigré,despite the nostalgic lilt in his voice.

‘Look,’ he said, ‘I’m flat broke, and I can’t afford to drinkand I just want to drink this one slowly.’

But that was the wrong angle too.

‘What’s that got to do with it, man? I said I’d buy you a drink, I don’t want you to buy me one. Come on, drink it down now.’

The little man had begun to talk loudly and one or two other drinkers were looking at them, so Grant gave up, drained his tiny glass and put it on the bar.

‘Make it two middies, miss,’ said the little man, and soon Grant felt again in his palm the solacing curve of a ten-ounce glass full of cold beer.

‘My name’s John Grant,’ he said unwillingly.

‘Tim Hynes.’And Grant shook the proffered hand. It was hard, and for some reason quite cool. Probably from holding beer glasses, thought Grant, whose own hands were soggy with sweat.

‘And how does a young fellow like you come to be broke?’

Oh God, these relentlessly friendly people whose sheer goodwill bordered on impertinence. Still, this was Bundanyabba and he was drinking the man’s beer and, you never knew, Hynes might be able to help him find work.

‘I lost my pay cheque and I’ve got to wait a few weeks until I can get another one.’That at any rate was literally true as far as it went.

‘A few weeks?’

‘I’m the schoolteacher out at Tiboonda, and I’d just got my Christmas holiday pay.’

But truth cannot be skirted indefinitely.

‘How did you come to lose it?’

‘I don’t know. Just lost it. Might have burned it with some rubbish when I was packing.’

‘And you’ve got no money?’

‘A few shillings.’

‘And how will you get your money?’

‘Oh, I’ve written to the Department—they’ll send me another cheque sooner or later, but they’re pretty slow.’

‘You’d come to The Yabba for your holidays had you, John?’

‘Not on your life! I was on my way to Sydney.’ Grant caught the slight discrepancy. ‘I didn’t realise I’d lost my cheque until this morning.’

‘Well, and what are you going to do until your pay comes?’

‘I haven’t the faintest idea.’ Now perhaps there might be some reward for his glib fabrication.

‘Well you’d better have another beer at any rate.Two more middies, miss!’

‘Look, thanks very much, but I don’t like drinking your beer when I can’t buy any…I…’

‘Ah, think nothing of it, John. Think nothing of it. I been broke myself many a time.’

‘I was thinking I might be able to get a job here for a couple of weeks.’

‘You might too, John, you might too.Thanks, miss.’ Hynes paid from a wallet fat with notes. He turned to Grant again.

‘And how do you like teaching out at Tiboonda?’

Grant no longer wanted to get rid of Hynes, but he suffered a little sick self-loathing when he realised it.

‘It’s all right, a bit out of the way.’

‘And you don’t like The Yabba?’

‘Well, I suppose I’m a bit browned off. It’s probably all right.’ Hell’s teeth! the things a man could say when he had to.

Hynes leaned towards him and banged down his glass for emphasis.

‘Son,’ he said intensely, ‘it’s the best little town in the world!’

Grant did his best to adopt an expression suitable to the occasion, but he could not for the life of him think what that expression might be. He smiled noncommittally.

‘Everybody here certainly seems to like it,’ he said.

‘’Course they do. Now, listen to me, John.’

Grant listened, and Hynes dropped his voice.

‘Are you a Mason?’

‘No.’

‘You’re in the Buffs?’

‘In the what?’

‘In the Buffs?’

‘The Buffs?’ Grant felt bemused.

‘The Buffaloes.’

‘The Buffaloes?’ Could this go on much longer?

But Hynes was exasperated too.

‘Are you a member of the Buffalo lodge?’

‘No. Never heard of it.’

‘Not a Mason and not a Buff,’ Hynes was nonplussed; then, as if in comprehension: ‘You’d be a Roman Catholic then?’

‘No, I’m not.’

‘Not that that’d be much help to you, anyway. Well what are you going to do?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘And you’re not a Buff?’

‘No. I’m not a Buff.’

‘Poor old John. Two more beers, miss!’

Grant did not bother to protest. He was beginning to feel withdrawn and his chagrin over his losses was turning to sadness. He was not used to heavy drinking after a light breakfast of pawpaw.

He drank with Hynes throughout the morning and talked of Bundanyabba, of Hynes’s work—he had something to do with one of the mines it appeared—of Hynes’s two beautiful daughters, and, later in the morning, of Hynes’s wonderful wife.

At first Grant kept trying to bring the conversation around to his chances of getting work in Bundanyabba, but that only set Hynes off on the imponderability of Grant’s not being a Buff, and Grant couldn’t stand it. So Grant, who soon didn’t care much anyway, just gave himself up to drinking.

And then, when Hynes was off buying some bottled beer to take home, Grant found himself leaning sombrely on the bar thinking of Robyn with deep melancholy.

Robyn spoke with a mellow, full voice and when she spoke her mouth moved a little shyly, a little boldly. Her eyes were grey and clear. There was a suggestion of oriental gravity in her fair, wide face, but the gravity disintegrated and crumbled away when she smiled. Her profile was calm and Grecian, her body soft and strong.

‘We’d better be getting home for dinner.’

Grant realised he had been smiling gently at the bar, and he felt his thoughts falling and bumping against one another as he rearranged them and turned to face Hynes, whose arms were full of bottled beer wrapped in brown paper.

‘I can hardly land in on your wife for dinner.’ Grant spoke slowly.

‘’Course you can. She’s used to it.’

‘Yes. But to be perfectly frank, old man, I’ve had a little too much to drink and I hardly like to visit a stranger’s home…’

‘There’s no strangers in TheYabba, man, come along now.’

It was almost one o’clock.They had been drinking for three hours and Hynes weaved as he led the way out of the bar. Grant walked straight, but slowly, very aware that he was holding himself together. Hynes opened the back door of a large Ford car and put the beer on the rear seat.

‘Hop in,’ he said to Grant and went around to the driver’s side.

Grant fumbled with the doorhandle, but got in all right.

The car had been standing in the sun for hours and the temperature inside made him gasp.

But he had the drunkard’s detachment and observed his own discomfort from afar.

Soon, he thought distantly, the future would have to be faced, but for the moment he was a man who lived life as he found it.

They drove to the outskirts of the city, past the Catholic Cathedral that looked too substantial and permanent for Bundanyabba.

Hynes’s home was a low, wide weatherboard bungalow with an attempt at a front garden.

Hynes led the way across the wide front veranda, pushed open the front door and went into a dark hallway which gave a promise of coolness that was not fulfilled, because it wasn’t cool anywhere in Bundanyabba in December.

‘Go in and sit down,’ he said to Grant, pushing him into a side room. ‘I’ll tell the wife we’re here.’

Grant was in a darkened sitting room, hung with heavy curtains, thickly carpeted.

The taste, he thought, is no doubt deplorable, but the comfort is enormous, and he sat down in a deep armchair, leather upholstery and wooden arms.

As his eyes became accustomed to the dimness he found himself doing small mental gymnastics, reluctantly abandoning his notion that the room must be over-furnished. It was quite pleasant.

He reached for a cigarette, found it was his last, and took one instead from an ornamental box on a coffee table.

He lit it and leaned back, inhaling. This at any rate was better than wandering up and down the streets, and when he felt a little more sober he would look seriously at the question of finding work.

After all, he was not completely ruined. He had only tofind some way of getting a few pounds together and he might even yet manage a couple of weeks in Sydney. And if he didn’t, well it was only another year in Tiboonda.

Another year in Tiboonda…let that go any way…better not think too brainsickly just now.

A tall, solemn girl came into the room and said:

‘Daddy will be in in a few minutes.’

Grant stood up suddenly, and, realising as he did it that it was a shade too courtly, bowed slightly and said:

‘How do you do?’

‘Fine—how are you?’And Grant knew by the way she said it that she realised he was two-thirds drunk.

She sat down in a chair opposite him.

‘I really must apologise for landing in on you like this.Your father more or less insisted.’

‘He usually does.’ And Grant felt that this had happened many times before, and he was just another shabby incident to be borne with tolerance.

She was very slim, but her body suggested a full roundness and the dark floral frock she was wearing clung to her as she moved. Her hair was long and dark, and her eyes were very big. So was her mouth, but not too big for her face. Grant had not known that there were girls like this in the west. They had all seemed lumpy, sweaty creatures with bad complexions.

He realised that he was standing staring at her and he sat down quickly, making a business of ashing his cigarette.

‘My name’s John Grant,’ he said, regretting his boorishness as he spoke.

She smiled formally and let him wait a little before she said: ‘I’m Janette Hynes.’

They both fell silent and the girl stretched back, resting her head on the upholstery of the chair and extending her arms until her fingertips rested on her knees. It was an expression of her reaction to the heat or the boredom of Grant’s presence, or both.

Grant wished he was either more drunk or more sober, but as he was he just could not meet the situation, and he sat silent, looking desperately at the cigarette he was smoking.

They remained like that for about three minutes and then Hynes came in with two large glasses of beer.

‘A quick one before dinner,’ he said.

Grant took the glass and again made some show of protesting against coming for a meal; but Hynes talked him down loudly, and while that was going on Janette quietly left the room.

Hynes recognised her departure in no way other than by sitting down in the chair she had left. He, too, was inclined to be silent, and Grant suspected that Mrs Hynes might nothave been so docile as her husband had anticipated.

Grant wondered about the appearance of the woman, who, together with this odd little man, had produced Janette. She must have been a late child, unless Mrs Hynes were much younger than Hynes.

‘Your daughter works in The Yabba,Tim?’

‘She’s a nurse.’

‘She’s your younger daughter is she?’

‘Yeah. The other girl’s thirty.’ Hynes did not seem as enthusiastic now about his daughter as he had been in the hotel.

Janette put her head around the door to say: ‘Mother wants you to come to dinner now.’

Hynes and Grant finished their beer quickly and went out through the hall towards the back of the house.

In the dining room Mrs Hynes was putting the last touches to the table and she looked up pleasantly enough as Hynes ushered Grant in. She was a square-shaped woman, younger than Hynes, but not much.

She brushed aside Grant’s apologies and sat him down at the table where some quite good cutlery was arranged meticulously on a great expanse of white starched tablecloth.

Janette sat at one end of the table, her mother at the other, Hynes and Grant on either side. The other daughter was not in evidence.

Hynes talked continuously through dinner. Mrs Hynes laughed politely sometimes, said ‘My, My!’ at appropriate points and displayed absolutely no interest in either Grant or Hynes. Janette said nothing. Grant gained the impression that Hynes was recognised as the head of the family and that his wishes were more or less law, but that nobody thought much of him. He had encountered similar situations in other western families.

The meal was the standard outback dinner of steak and potatoes with unidentifiable tinned vegetables. But it was well prepared and Grant, his appetite inflamed by beer, ate it so readily that it was not until Mrs Hynes said ‘Would you like some more, Mr Grant?’ that he realised he was scraping up the gravy.

‘No. No thank you. Quite an excellent dinner, thank you,’ he muttered, avoiding looking at Janette.

They ate some sort of custard tart for dessert, and Hynes immediately took Grant back into the sitting room with a couple of bottles of beer while Janette and her mother cleared away the table.

Grant felt more in possession of himself after the meal and determined not to drink any more. But he took one glass from Hynes, just to hold on to, and helped himself to another cigarette from the box on the table.

‘Well,’ he said to Hynes, ‘I suppose I’d better be getting along soon.’

‘Getting along? Where to?’

‘Well I…well…I suppose I should be looking for work.’

‘You won’t find work on a Saturday.’

‘No, probably not, but I…well…’

‘Oh drink your beer, man, and enjoy yourself—why don’t you?’

‘Yes, but you see I’ve really got to do something.’

‘We’ll think about that later; now drink your beer, man, and stop worrying.’

The house vibrated as heavy feet thumped on the veranda. Hynes, his face brightening, called: ‘Come in, men, come in!’

Two huge men, about thirty, in open-necked shirts, loomed in the doorway.

‘G’day, Tim,’ they said, and ‘G’day, John,’ when they were introduced to Grant.

Hynes went hurrying out to get more glasses, and Grant knew a few moments’ awful anticipation until one of the men at last said: ‘New to The Yabba, John?’

But Hynes came back before he had to go through it all again.

Hynes and his two friends fell to simultaneous speaking, exchanging the clumsy insults that pass for repartee in the west.Apart from a few minor variations in feature, the newcomers appeared almost identical, even to the patches of thick curly hair that appeared between their throats and their shirts.

One day, thought Grant, he would make a fortune by manufacturing those for sale, like dickies.

The two men were apparently miners who worked with Hynes. One was named Dick and the other Joe; and despite all appearances it seemed they were not brothers, nor even remotely related.

Whenever Grant had thought of miners at all he had thought of them as grimy people, who emerged from the ground like moles, except that they would blink and shake their heads, and who probably spoke with Welsh accents. These two were very well-scrubbed specimens, who spoke with the nasal twang developed by people unable to open their mouths too wide because of dust.

Grant found himself allowing his glass to be refilled, and then, surprised to find it empty, filled once more. Hynes seemed to have forgotten him and was engrossed in a conversation, largely incomprehensible to Grant, revolving around a pack of greyhounds the two miners owned jointly.

‘Do you race the dogs?’ Grant ventured once.

Dick looked at him as though surprised that he was still there.

‘What else?’ he said, and turned back to Hynes.

Grant gave his attention to his cigarette again, wondering, blearily now, how best to make his escape—and then where to escape to. But there was no real answer, so he just sat.

After a while he let his eyes close, and the voices became a constant unbroken drone. A warm drone, like bees, very big bees, on a hot, very hot, day.

Sinking, sinking, gently sinking, just enough awareness to know that it was pleasant to go down, down, blurry warmth, heavy heavy limbs at rest, the sense of flowing out, draining out, sinking slowly down without fear.

‘You’ll spill that beer if you don’t sit up straight.’

Janette was sitting on a stool near his chair.

Grant shook his head and worked his jaw muscles, struggling to dissipate the fog that gripped his mind and body. It went slowly, reluctantly, painfully.

‘I’m sorry,’ he said, ‘fell asleep.’

Hynes and his friends were still talking earnestly about dogs, and didn’t seem to have noticed.

Janette offered no help. She just sat there, impassive, unexpectant.

Grant took a huge swallow of beer from his glass and attempted a smile. It didn’t work because his face wasn’t responding properly.

But damn it all, there was a limit to the humiliation he could stand.

He pushed himself to his feet and said, a little too loudly: ‘I’ll be moving off,Tim, thanks for your hospitality.’

The three men broke off their conversation and looked at him. The young men’s faces were blank, but Hynes’s was perplexed, he didn’t quite know what to do about Grant. Obviously he was tempted to let him go and forget about him. For a moment Grant thought he was going to do just that, and he began to wish he had not suggested it…back to the streets of Bundanyabba.

‘Where would you be going, man?’

The question was not answerable and Grant floundered, muttering inarticulately, knowing and glad that Hynes was going to insist that he stay.

Hynes advanced on him with a bottle of beer.

‘You just hang around for a while,’ he said, filling Grant’s glass, ‘we’ve got to see about fixing you up with a job.’

Grant was sure by now that Hynes had no means or intention of finding him work, but it was better really to shelve things for a while longer. There was no point in staggering off half drunk.

‘Sit down and talk to Janette,’ said Hynes. ‘Can’t you content yourself with a pretty girl for an hour or two?’ Hyneswent back to his friends, leaving the statement like a lump of something faintly distasteful between Grant and Janette, something not to be adverted to, but something of which both were unduly aware.

Or at least Grant thought they should both have been aware of it. In fact Janette smiled as he sat down again and said:

‘What do you want to work for?’

‘The usual reason, to get money.’ He looked at his watch, it was almost half past five. How long had he sat there in a stupor?

Janette was looking at him enquiringly, and, was he wrong, or was there an element of warmth about her—a certain nuance in her manner that seemed to admit him to the circle of people she might be prepared to know.

Some further elaboration of his position was obviously required, so he gave her the same version of his plight as he had given her father.

‘Still,’ she said, ‘you’ll be all right as soon as the cheque comes, won’t you?’

Grant found his glass empty every time he looked at it, and Hynes, still fretful and uncertain about his guest, kept coming across the room, filling his glass and assuring him that he would ‘fix him up’.

Hynes was very drunk, and Grant could feel himself following down the pastel sprung corridors of inebriation; his voice echoing splendidly in his own ears; his frame larger than life, expanded and buoyant; and, he was sure, an ironic smile on his lips as he mocked life and his own predicament.

Grant was a fairly good drunk, and even though he was barely aware of what he was doing, he quite adroitly managed the salad and meat dish that was served him and the other men in the dining room later that evening by a silent Mrs Hynes.

And he did not stagger as he made his way out of the room.

But there were gaps in the chain of happenings and he could not quite remember how he had moved from point to point.

His voice was full and rich and he spoke very slowly as he asked Janette why on earth she stayed in Bundanyabba.

He was out on the front veranda. Heaven only knew where the others were, but Janette was standing quite close to him, very close.

The western stars crammed the sky except where the moon blotted them out as it squandered its light in a stream cascading down to lend brief grace to the city of Bundanyabba.

Grant breathed deeply of the lukewarm air and gazed with majestic melancholy at the gleaming rooftops of the city.

‘The moonlight,’ he said. ‘Like snow upon the desert’s dusty face.’

Janette didn’t respond, so he added: ‘You know, “lighting a little hour or two”.’

Still she said nothing.

‘That’s from a poem,’ he said, a little less grandly.

‘I know.’

Was he making an ass of himself? Janette didn’t seem to think so. Janette was talking to him now. He couldn’t quite catch what she was saying, but it sounded pleasant. Janette’s voice was low and soft, and Robyn was almost two thousand miles away, and in any case Robyn was a lost cause and Janette had a peculiar beauty of her own. Janette was lovely and lithe and solemn, and Janette was very close.

‘Would you care to go for a stroll,’ he said, smiling down at her, his face, he hoped, a mask of attractive suffering.

Somehow he got the impression that his suggestion was not so much an idea of his own as a statement of her intentions. Perhaps he was very drunk after all.

Then he was standing alongside Janette in the lounge room and Janette was saying:

‘Daddy, John and I are going for a walk.’

The three men looked dully at them, and one of the miners seemed cross, but it didn’t matter because soon they were walking along the street, he was alone with Janette in the night and the moon was making even the dust beautiful.

Somewhere in the whirling recesses of his mind he knew this was all a little too easy. Janette had not been impressed with him earlier in the day. He could not remember just when he had become attached to her, but she didn’t seem to have said anything much; and there was an air of compliance now in the way she walked and the way she had let him take her hand.

Why should she comply? Who was this tall, dark girl who was walking with him now out past the limits of this barbaric city?

They turned off the road.

Who had initiated that movement? Grant held his mind hard and looked at the girl beside him. She seemed purposeful; she seemed…what did she seem?…why was she so quiet?

They were walking on hard dusty ground, wasteland between one of the mines and the city, and they threw great long shadows in the moonlight.

Grant looked again at the girl, but he felt his mind slip and his thoughts shambled off on their drunken round again.

It was very quiet out there, there was not enough vegetation for insects and their footsteps on the dust were the only sound. Grant realised they had not spoken for five minutes or more.

‘You’re very…quiet,’ he said.

‘Am I?’ Her voice was deeper, almost hoarse, and it disturbed Grant.

She didn’t say anything more and now she was walking with her head very close to Grant’s, and his eyes would not focus properly so she had two profiles.

Her eyes were glazed and her mouth was open. She was looking straight ahead, and walking quite quickly, leading him by the hand.

Grant began to suspect a great deal, and knew for certain that he ought not to be as drunk as he was. Something of the intensity that gripped the girl was cutting through to Grant as she strained forward, her body taut. She wasn’t walking, she was going somewhere.

Some instinct of caution moved him to say:

‘Won’t your father be worried if we stay out too long?’ But it sounded foolish even to his ears.

They came to a slight hollow in the ground in which a patch of low scrub had grown like a hedge with a clear section in the middle.

Grant no longer merely suspected; he knew that Janette had brought him here, and he knew why. Nobody could be that drunk.

She slipped through the scrub into the clear space and he followed her.

They stopped for a moment and stood together, two tall thin figures in the moonlight between the mine and the city.

The urgency seemed to have left her and she sank down on to the bare ground, and lay on her back, her hands clasped behind her head. Grant stood above her briefly, feeling that something required to be said, and then he sat down beside her.

Her eyes were closed and she was breathing deeply. Grant ran a hand experimentally over her face. She moved her head so that her open lips touched his fingers.

‘You know you’re very…beautiful,’ he said, but he didn’t like the sardonic smile that caught her lips as he said it. Perhaps no words were required after all.

He took out his last cigarette and lit it, and found that somehow Janette had moved so that her head was on his thigh.

He looked up at the sky and did his best to think with whatever powers still survived the alcohol. It was obvious that he was being tempted to seduce this girl, or allow himself tobe seduced by her, and he wanted things a little clearer than this. Besides, there were certain technical difficulties…

Still, she must know, so why not? He would. He would? Yes he would, why not? Yes he would.

He still felt he ought to say something, but there didn’t seem to be anything to say, or anything that would be well received anyway.

There was Robyn, Robyn’s hair was fair…but Robyn wasn’t here. Robyn was a long way away. And what was Robyn to him, anyway?

Suddenly he remembered that he had never had a woman before, and he knew that if he were more sober he would have been startled by the thought. But as it was, he just felt swept away by the inevitability of it all. The time for retreat had passed.

He was too drunk to know the compulsions of passion, but the anaesthetised impulses within him dictated his actions and he stretched out beside her, crushing his cigarette in the dust, putting an arm across her body.

They lay face to face. All Grant could see was a blur of cheeks, hair, lips and great closed eyes. He pressed closer, raised himself on an elbow and touched her throat with his hand.

They lay there for perhaps a minute, Janette breathing more and more rapidly and never once opening her eyes.

Grant kissed her, a little clumsily; but then she responded and it was strange how her lips seemed to caress his, and Ah! there at last was a flicker of passion that seemed to strike through him to her, but it didn’t last long.

A fox yapped somewhere out behind the mine and the sound served only to increase their immense isolation.

Sadness caught at Grant as he wondered what to do next. This was not quite what he had planned for himself, and what if he should sire a child out here in the barren land he hated? How the girl’s body quivered and shook. His own was passive now, and he wished that he could lose himself in desire, but all he had was a dreary certainty of his own intentions.

The fox yapped again, further away now.

Grant lay there looking at Janette, bemusedly wondering at himself and at her, and at the moonlight on the dust.

Slowly Janette moved her hand towards her throat and undid the buttons of her dress. She drew the cloth aside and Grant saw she wore nothing else.

She spread her arms out and let her head fall back, baring her breasts to the moon.

Still Grant lay there, staring at her now, longing for the fierce pleasure this should give him.

There was something more to all of it than just this, something more surely, even in the way of simple pleasure.

The fox yapped again, so far away now it could barely be heard.

Janette reached out an arm and drew Grant down across her body. Passion flickered again and he gave himself to the task in hand.

But even as her arms closed around his neck nausea gripped him, violently, incredibly.

He rolled off her body and knelt in the scrub and vomited and vomited, painfully and noisily in abject humiliation.

Sick and ashamed he turned again at last to Janette. She was standing outside the circle of scrub. Her dress was buttoned up.

‘Sorry,’ said Grant, ‘we’d better go back.’

Janette said nothing and they walked back on to the road and now the moonlight was harsh and brittle.

Grant let his drunkenness take control; he sank into it as a man will fall asleep to stop thinking.

Afterwards there were only patches of the rest of that night that he ever remembered…

—Janette brushing down his jacket before they reached the house.

—The men singing inside. They looked at him when he came in and someone had laughed.

—Janette being gone, lost somewhere between the frontgate and the sitting room where the men were singing.

—Another man at the party. ‘This is Doc Tydon,’ they had said. A sparse little man with a moustache.

—Beer being handed to him and his drinking it hurriedly, without pleasure, seeking only absence of thought and feeling.

—More beer and more beer.

—Then the beer had run out and there had been whisky.

—Then the whisky had run out and there had been some kind of liqueur, sweet and sticky.

—’How do you find The Yabba, John?’ Who the devil had asked that?

—Angry words, but who was angry with whom?

Until at last oblivion came and Grant succeeded in annihilating himself utterly, for the time being at any rate.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

[3]

He was crouching in a corner of the schoolroom at Tiboonda, behind a desk and a man with a revolver was going to shoot him. The report of the revolver hurt his head and the flare of the explosion hurt his eyes.

And he was dead.

Pause.

Oblivion.

He was back in the corner, and the gunman was going to shoot him again and he knew it was for the second time. The pain in his head.The pain in his eyes. It was the fear more than anything. He was going to be killed and there was nothing he could do about it. The explosion. The flash.

And he was dead.

Pause.

Oblivion.

When he opened his eyes the light was unbearable and he shut them. But he had to open them again to see where he was.

He was lying on a stretcher. His clothes were saturated with sweat. Thirst was ploughing furrows in his throat. His head hurt and hurt and hurt.

Where the devil was he?

He stood up and swayed as pain swilled around inside his skull.

There was a door over there, and there was someone beyond that door. He could hear plates being moved.

Grant walked over and pulled open the door. It led to a sort of kitchen, and a man with his back to him was cooking something on a Primus stove.

The man turned around, sparse and little, with a moustache.

‘G’day,’ he said.

Grant had to try three times before he could form the greeting ‘G’day’.

‘I suppose you feel lousy?’ said the man.

‘Yes,’ said Grant, who thought he was going to faint, or die.

‘Like a drink?’ said the man.

‘Water,’ said Grant.

‘Beer,’ said the man.

‘Just water, thanks,’ said Grant, who felt that he would scream if he had to speak again without drinking something.

‘Yabba water’s only good for cooking,’ said the man. He went to a small kerosene refrigerator and took out a glass of beer.

‘I let it go flat,’ he said, ‘it’s better that way when you feel the way you do.’

Grant took the glass and thought he would vomit again when the sour smell of flat beer reached his nostrils. But he had to drink something and it wasn’t bad once he was halfway through.

‘I’m very sorry,’ he said, ‘but could you tell me who you are?’

‘Tydon,’ said the man,’Doc Tydon—you met me last night at Hynes’s place.’

Grant let that sink in. Hynes’s place last night. Memory hit him a treacherous blow. He looked down at his clothes.They were unmistakably stained. O God, but at least the thought about that could wait until the pain had gone.

‘You’d better sit down,’ said Tydon, pushing a fruit box across.

Grant sat on it. Tydon took his glass and filled it from another one out of the refrigerator.

‘I don’t think I want another one, thanks,’ said Grant.

‘Two is what you want when you look like that. Then you’d better eat.’

Grant drank half the beer submissively.

‘What am I doing here?’

‘I brought you here last night. You were stung.’

‘Stung?’

‘Hit. Blotto, blind, inebriated—call it what you like.’

‘Sorry. I’m not too clear about things yet.What happened?’

‘You just drank yourself under the table after your little episode with Janette.’

Grant felt his face sagging at that.

‘Don’t get upset. We’ve all had little episodes with Janette.’

This would all take a great deal of thinking about when he felt better, but at the moment thinking was not a very practical proposition.

‘Eat some of this,’ said Tydon, pointing at a plate he had laid out heaped with a mash of meat and vegetables.

‘Thanks very much, but I don’t feel particularly like eating.’

‘No, but you’d better eat just the same—come on.’

Grant could not argue. He pulled the box over to the table and began to eat the food with a spoon Tydon gave him. Infact, it did make him feel better. He ate it all.

Memory struck at him again—his suitcases, where were they?

He’d left them in a hotel.Which hotel? Dear God! He had no chance of finding them again. He felt tears in his eyes and fought them back. He’d lost money, honour, virtue and now his suitcases, and the suitcases seemed the most grievous loss of all.

But damn it! He couldn’t break down and weep in front of this man Tydon.

‘That must have been quite a party last night,’ he said.

‘It’s always like that at Hynes’s on the weekend.’

‘What time did we finish?’

‘About dawn.’

‘What’s the time now?’ His own watch had stopped.

‘About four o’clock.’

‘Hell!’ Grant did his best to stand up briskly.’Well, thanks for your hospitality. I’d better be getting along.’ He’d said that somewhere before recently…of course…at Hynes’s.

‘You’ve got nowhere to go, so you might as well stay here.’

‘But I can’t stay here indefinitely.’ He felt a need to explain himself. You see I’m the schoolteacher at Tiboonda and I lost my…’

‘Yes. I heard all that crap last night. I don’t believe a word of it.’

‘You don’t?’

‘No.’ Tydon was carelessly contemptuous.

‘But…why not?’

‘I saw you at the Game on Friday night.’

‘Ah…’

‘What did you want to lie about it for?’

‘Well, a man feels a bit of a fool…’

‘Better men than you have been made fools of at the Game.’

Grant could see and hear Tydon clearly for the first time now and he didn’t like him much. He had very bad teeth.

‘No doubt. But in any case I can’t stay in your…cabin indefinitely, can I?’

‘It’s not my cabin. Belongs to the mines. I’ve just been living in it for five years.’

‘Yes, well anyway…’

‘You might as well stay here as try to sponge on men like Tim Hynes.’

There was not much to say to that, so Grant sat there and looked out of the small window of the kitchen. The plain dwindling away to dancing heat haze made him turn his head hurriedly.

He had to say something to Tydon, he supposed, so he said:

‘You’ve lived here for five years?’

Tydon reacted as though he had been waiting for the question.

‘If it will satisfy your curiosity about me,’ he said, although Grant was not aware of having expressed any particular curiosity about him, ‘I am a doctor of medicine and an alcoholic.’

Grant did not care, and could not see what that had to do with the length of time he had been living in the hut, but Tydon went on:

‘I came to Bundanyabba seven years ago because it is probably the only place in Australia where I could practise medicine without the fact that I was an alcoholic preventing people coming to me.

‘I discovered in one month flat that I could live and drink as much as I liked without working at anything, provided I remained what the locals term a “character”.’

Grant said ‘Hmm,’ and hoped the monologue had come to an end. It hadn’t.

‘I remained a character. I live in this hut. I obtain all my meals free from my many friends who also provide me with my requirements in beer, which, with some self-control, is the only alcohol I allow myself.’

That was probably all a lie, including the part about being a doctor, thought Grant, but what the hell? Who was he to worry about people lying, anyway? Just the same, he did not like Tydon.

Tydon was again drinking flat beer, and Grant suspected now that it was flat because it was the remnants of open bottles from the night before which Tydon had scavenged.

‘And you get along without money altogether?’ he asked, because Tydon obviously expected some reaction to his self-revelation.

‘Not quite—I have a couple of pounds from a war pension; but it’s possible to live on The Yabba without money, provided you conform.’

Was this wretched man suggesting that he, John Grant, should ‘conform’, should adopt the same wretched life as Tydon?

At that, it might be the solution to the next six weeks.

But not here, not in this oven of a hut. And damn it, he had to get out of Bundanyabba after that episode last night, apart from anything else.

Tydon opened the refrigerator to get more beer and Grant saw a number of partly empty bottles on the lower shelf.

The pain in his head had settled down to a gnawing ache that he did not think he could stand for long.

‘You wouldn’t have an A.P.C., would you?’ he asked.

‘No,’ said Tydon, ‘but I’ve got something a lot better.’

He pulled a tin out of his pocket, opened it and took out one of a number of large white pills.

‘This’ll fix your headache and pep you up a bit.’

Grant took the pill from Tydon reluctantly. He fully shared the rest of Australia’s distrust of alcoholic doctors.

‘Wash it down with beer, it’s better that way,’ said Tydon, filling Grant’s glass.

‘I…I find a lot of drugs upset me…perhaps I’ll…’

‘There’s nothing in that will hurt you,’ said Tydon with authority, ‘swallow it.’

There were few things Grant would not do rather than suffer embarrassment, and he swallowed the pill in a gulp of beer.

It had no immediate harmful effect.

Tydon rolled a cigarette from a pouch of tobacco and handed the pouch across to Grant. Grant’s mouth felt as though it was coated with soft cement but his being yearned for a cigarette, and with fumbling and slightly trembling fingers he rolled one.

If he could get through today and just take a few drinks to soothe his sick body, he would think hard tomorrow about getting work or getting to Sydney.

And for the meantime, why not stay here? But about his clothes…

‘I’ve left my suitcases in a pub somewhere, I’d better try to find them, I think,’ he said.

‘I wouldn’t worry,’ said Tydon,’they’ll be there tomorrow and you’ve got an appointment in half an hour.’

‘I have?’

‘Forgotten that too? You’re going ‘roo shooting with Dick and Joe.’

‘Dick and Joe?’

‘The two miners at Hynes’s last night.’ Tydon added conversationally, ‘You were lucky Joe didn’t beat you to a pulp.’

‘What did I do?’

‘Janette.’

‘Oh…I see. Actually you know, nothing happened between me and her.’ He didn’t know why he bothered to tell that to Tydon.

‘No?’

Grant didn’t feel like pursuing the point. After all it had not been his fault, or Janette’s that nothing had happened.

‘Janette,’ said Tydon, determined to discuss her, ‘is a very interesting biological case.’

‘So?’

‘If she were a man she’d have been jailed for rape two years ago.’

‘Go on. What’s all this about kangaroo shooting?’

‘You arranged to go shooting, that’s all.’

‘With a man who was going to beat me to a pulp last night?’

‘Yes. But you’ll be safe enough while Janette’s not around. Now if I ever married, Janette is just the sort of girl I’d marry. She likes sex, she likes to experiment and she likes variety.’

Grant listened in despair; he was in no condition to listen to the prurient speculations of this wretched man.

‘And she’s an intelligent girl, she’s got a good body and a pretty enough face.’

Grant thought of Janette’s face as he had seen it, sharp against the moonlight and, later, blurred and close to his. Oh Robyn, Robyn of the cool white skirts.

‘Moreover, like most of the other men who’ve met her, I know what she’s like in bed; and she’s good, damned good.’

That did not ring true to Grant. Tydon seemed to him a nasty little psychopath who had neither been a doctor nor gone to bed with Janette, even assuming that bed was a euphemism for that bare patch in the circle of scrub between the city and the mine.

‘I thought about marrying her once,’ Tydon spoke savagelyall the time, as though contemptuously quelling somebody in a bitter argument,’but I couldn’t live with any woman for long. Just the same I think I’ll bring her out here for a while again soon.’

Great, thought Grant, wonderful; but what did he do? Get up and stalk out into the sun? Stalk over the hot dust to the city? and then stalk up and down the streets until he dropped dead from heat prostration?

No, he would sit here and let Tydon tell him about his sex life, or supposed sex life, or rather supposed life—it was certainly sexy…he lost the train of the thought.

Tydon was still talking.

‘But what’s wrong with a woman taking a man when she feels like one?’

‘I…don’t really know.’

‘You don’t know because there’s nothing wrong with it, nothing. It’s a damned sensible, civilised way to behave.’

‘And yet you’d find people who’d call Janette a slut— women who’d like to act like her, and men she hasn’t given a tumble.’

‘Are you coming shooting?’

‘Yes. Sex is just like eating, or sleeping or eliminating. It’s a thing you do because you have to or because you want to. Have another drink. And yet it’s been surrounded by all themystery and ballyhoo of centuries for God knows what reason.’

‘Thanks.’ But that must be the last drink for today.

Tydon was sitting hunched on his box, making spasmodic little movements with his haunches as he talked so that he seemed to be twitching in pain.

Grant noticed that the ache in his head had been replaced by a sensation which was, if anything, worse—a sort of humming vibration which seemed to start at the top of his spine and spread to the top of his skull and back down again into his body.

That, he thought, was doubtless the ‘pepping-up’ that Tydon had promised.

He wished he had not taken that pill.

Tydon, twitching all the time, went on and went on about Janette, his face slipping a little each time he mentioned her name, about sex hygiene, about social disease, about conception and miscarriage and abortion and homosexuality (a lot of nonsense was talked about homosexuality, there was nothing wrong with it, although he didn’t practise it himself) and about genital organs and the effects of their size on cohabitation and about Janette and about Janette and about Janette.

Grant felt as though he had been released from dank andnoisome captivity when a car drew up outside, a horn sounded, a dog barked and a voice shouted:’Come on, Doc!’

Tydon went to the door.

Grant flinched at the block of light that fell into the room.

‘Come in, be ready in a minute.’

There was some disturbance outside as the men got out of the car and resisted the efforts of the dog to follow them. Then they were in the hut, big, boisterous, booming, showing no effects at all of the previous night’s debauch. But then they probably hadn’t debauched as much as Grant had.

‘Hi, John!’ they said, ‘Feeling lousy, eh?’ and ‘Take a hair of the dog, boy, a hair of the dog,’ and ‘Come on, Doc, shake a leg.’

Tydon had opened a homemade cupboard and taken out a very efficient-looking rifle.

‘We’ve got a gun for you, John,’ said the miners. ‘It hasn’t been used in five years so it might blow your head off.’

‘Ha. Ha.’

‘Come on, Doc, let’s get out of here.’

And they were out of the hut, climbing into a big American car. Most of the population of Bundanyabba seemed to affect big American cars, of varying vintage.

Opening the rear door Grant found himself looking into the face of an enormous greyhound. It filled most of the backof the car and its legs overflowed into the front and out of the window. Its great slobbering tongue was everywhere, and it dribbled.

But Grant rather liked the yellow and fawn beast—it was the first living thing he had seen in Bundanyabba that seemed reasonably uncomplicated and was certain not to talk to him.

He pushed into the bony and yielding tangle of dog and found himself room on the back seat. Joe, or Dick, he wasn’t sure which, pushed in beside him. Tydon got in the front and the other miner took the wheel.

They were on their way, four men and a dog, stewing together.

When you travel by road in the west you travel with a cohort of dust which streams up from your tyres and rolls away in a disintegrating funnel, defining the currents of air your vehicle sets in motion. And somehow a lot of dust comes in the windows and settles in your hair and your clothes and most of all in your eyes and throat.

And the heat is unthinkable, no matter how widely the windows are open, and the sweat streams off your body and into your socks, and if there are a number of people in the car their body stenches mingle disagreeably.

So it was with Grant and Tydon and Joe and Dick and theyellow and fawn dog, except that the dog did not sweat, but its mouth gaped hideously and it panted stertorously and its tongue lolled out and it dribbled and it smelt; Lord how it smelt!

The miner drove fast on the rudimentary road, bouncing high on the ruts and slewing fiercely in the drifts of soft dust.

The western roads are cut with causeways built in the hope of channelling whatever rain falls into some useful direction. These cannot be seen in the flat country until you’re almost on them. And if you’re travelling at sixty miles an hour you don’t have time to slow down before you hit them and the front wheels of your car shoot briefly into the air and the car lands with a crash two feet down, then shoots up the other side and crashes on to the level of the road again.

It plays hell with the springs and Grant thought he was going to die every time it happened and every time the big dog’s body bounced limply to the roof of the car and flopped down again, mostly on Grant.

A dim acceptance of the fact that this whole situation was near farce was no consolation as he shrank into the seat between the dog and the miner.

He felt himself in the impossible position of a man with an overwhelming problem to solve, but lacking the neural energy even to make an attempt to solve it. Some time hehad to think about getting to Sydney, or doing something, but not now, not just now.

‘We’d better have a drink at Yindee,’ said the miner driving the car.

‘It’ll be dark if we do, Dick,’ said the miner sitting beside Grant, from which Grant deduced that he must be Joe.

‘So what?’

‘So we want to have a go with the dog.’

‘We’ll see something before we hit Yindee.’

‘All right.’

Grant felt obliged to add something to the conversation.

‘Where,’ he said, ‘is Yindee?’

‘About sixty miles out of The Yabba,’ said Joe.

Grant wondered whether it was Joe or Dick he had upset by his interlude with Janette last night. Tydon had named one of them, hadn’t he? Anyhow, neither seemed at all put out today.

‘How do you feel after last night?’ said Joe, startling Grant a little.

‘Bloody.’

‘Hit it a bit hard, eh?’

‘Much too hard.’

‘Cheer up, a few drinks’ll put you on your feet.’

Grant looked forward cheerlessly to the few drinks atYindee. Even one round would halve his capital resources, two would pauperise him.

He should not have come on this trip, but he could hardly have stayed in the hut. Tydon seemed to expect him to stay there indefinitely, but he hadn’t put it in so many words.

Dear God, the air in this car was foul.

Abruptly the car stopped dead and the funnel of dust which had been trailing behind caught up and enveloped it.

‘Down there,’ said Dick, and pointed.

The country slid away a little to the left, forming a minutely shallow valley about a mile wide which, in a gentler land, might have been split by a stream. Running parallel with the road about a quarter of a mile away a low line of shrub formed a swathe across the otherwise bare earth.

On the other side of the scrub Grant could see a mob of about twenty kangaroos.

The dog had seen them too, or smelt them, and was slavering around the window, thrusting its hindquarters into Grant’s face, lashing him with its tail.

Joe reached across and opened the door.

The dog vaulted from the car and hurtled towards the kangaroos, moving in unbelievably long bounds, floating, touching the ground, bouncing up, floating…its formerly ungainly limbs co-ordinated into a magnificent motivating principle.

The kangaroos watched it impassively until it was about two hundred yards from them. Then they turned and leaped away, stiffly erect, propelling themselves with thrusts of their giant hind legs so that they looked like so many mechanical toys, except that at the height of their leap their tails streamed out behind them and their bodies leaned forward so that they speared through the air like abstractions of flight.

Grant forgot even his hangover as he watched the hunter springing after the kangaroos as they crossed the plain like the shadows of aircraft.

The mob rose in a wave over one of the occasional fences that appear inexplicably in the plain country, but two baulked and turned along the fence towards the road.

Immediately the motor of the car roared, the gear slammed in and Dick drove diagonally off the road, cutting across the flight of the two kangaroos.

There was not much difference between the road and the open country, but there were boulders on the plain and Dick performed mighty deeds with the car, keeping it at fifty miles an hour, swerving hard when he reached the fence and driving straight down to the kangaroos.

The dog anticipated the manoeuvre and turned diagonally out from the fence.

The kangaroos sighted the car and they too turned outfrom the fence, heading back to the patch of scrub. And now the kangaroos and the dog were travelling in two lines which would soon meet.

Tydon had his rifle out now and was firing through the window. Joe was trying to aim across Grant’s shoulder, and still the car bounced over the ground at fifty miles an hour.

The men were shouting, the motor was roaring, the sharp smell of gunpowder drowned all the other smells in the car.

The dog pulled down one of the kangaroos in a tangled heap about fifty yards from the fence. The other kangaroo paused for a moment when its mate fell and Grant could see it watching the slaughter, immobile, expressionless.Then it streaked back towards the fence again.

But the car was between it and the fence.

Dick, yelling madly now, drove straight at the kangaroo, pressing down the accelerator, driving as no sane man would do, crashing over stones, through low scrub, wrecking the mudguards on the remnants of trees, and still the kangaroo came on, unharmed by the fusillade of bullets which Tydon was pumping out the window.

Grant clung to the seat, fascinated, watching through the windscreen the fluctuating approach of the kangaroo. Up it went and down, then up, up, and down, a wild grey figure bearing down on them as though in passionless attack.

It turned ten yards from the car, but Dick, quite mad now, pulled the car around and ran the animal down.

It disappeared quite suddenly under the bonnet.

A thud, the car lifted, skidded, rocketed almost over on to its side, righted itself and stopped.

Grant looked out of the rear window as the others tumbled out. A grey bundle was flopping about in the dust behind the car.

Following the others over to the broken mess, Grant saw Dick draw a long-bladed knife from a sheath at his side, kneel down, and cut the animal’s throat. It died then.

‘It’s not worth cutting up,’ said Dick.The kangaroo had split open and trailed entrails for a dozen yards. Its body was so shattered that bones stood out from the skin every few inches, white and glistening.

Joe and Dick started off to look at the damage to the car, but Tydon lingered, took out his own knife and neatly castrated the carcass.

Grant watched the incident blankly and Joe said:’Doc eats ‘em, reckons they’re the best part of the ‘roo.’

Grant thought wanly of the hash that Tydon had given him that afternoon.

Tydon, meanwhile, slipped the scrotum into his pocket and they all walked over to the car then.

The radiator grille was dented slightly and there was a fairly deep curve in the bumper bar. Underneath they could see grey patches on the gearbox.

They all got back in and Dick drove across to where the greyhound was worrying the other carcass.

‘He’s a dead loss too,’ said Joe.

The kangaroo had apparently had some disease, its hindquarters and belly were a mass of black scabs.

Joe dragged the dog away and bundled it into the car. Now it smelt of blood and dead kangaroo.

It snuggled against Grant.

The vibrations in his head that Grant had noticed back in the hut had become a fierce drumming that pervaded his whole body. He felt unnaturally alert, as though he had constantly the physical reaction of having just been made aware of danger.

‘What was in the pill you gave me?’ he asked Tydon as they drove off.

‘Benzedrine and stuff,’ said Tydon, ‘want another?’

‘No thanks.’

One thing was certain now, thought Grant, once this hunting episode was over he would not return to Tydon’s hut.

The sexual mania he could bear; the heat had to be borne anyway; Tydon’s breath was noxious, but not impossible; theman’s conversation was appalling, but probably sufferable for a time; but a diet of kangaroo’s testicles was altogether too much. He would set out to walk back to Sydney before he would stay with Tydon.

Joe rummaged on the floor of the car and came up with a twenty-two rifle.

‘This is yours,’ he said to Grant.

‘Oh, thanks.’ It seemed quite a reasonable weapon, a single shot with a much scarred stock, but apparently unmarked barrel.

Joe gave him a large handful of cartridges.

‘Plenty more here if you want them. Know how to use that?’

‘Yes, thanks.’ Grant worked the loading mechanism.

‘Done a bit of shooting?’

‘Oh, on the coast, a few rabbits now and then.’

The car shuddered and the dog rose to the roof and came down, banging its jaw on the barrel of the rifle.

‘Are all the roads around here like this?’

‘This isn’t bad. You ought to go out to Mundameer.’

‘Where are we going now?’

‘Place out from Yindee we know. We’ll get a lot of’roos there.’

‘Do we shoot in the dark?’

‘Spotlight. We’ve got a beaut.’

The sun was setting, dropping down below a cloudless horizon, glowing red through the dust haze low to the ground. To the east the plain melted into mauve and black.

The township of Yindee popped out of the darkening country quite suddenly. It was one lone, long, low hotel.

They pulled up right at the door, clumped over the inevitable wooden veranda and Dick called for four beers.

‘There’s a fox,’ said Joe.

In the fading light about fifty yards down the road they could see it, padding along on the dust, looking as though it was going somewhere.

Elaborately casual, Tydon, Joe and Dick walked back to the car. Grant followed them.

They took out their rifles. Grant took out his.

Three rifles cracked. Grant was still loading his.

The fox swung around and lolloped back down the road. Dust flicked up around it as the bullets landed. It turned at right angles and began to run across the road, and then it dropped its neck, slid a little way, kicked and lay still.

The greyhound was by now hysterical, but they did not let it out of the car.

It had been an extremely good, or lucky, shot that had brought down the fox in that light. Grant, who had got inone shot, and rather thought he might have hit the fox, wanted to go and get it; but the others wouldn’t hear of it.

‘Mangy brute,’ said Joe, ‘not worth skinning. They never are out here.’

So the fox was left on the road and they all went into the bar where the publican, unmoved by the fusillade at his front door, had set up the beer.

Grant, who had been thinking a great deal about the paying for this beer, took out his ten-shilling note at the prompting of a furtive and unadmitted instinct, and tossed it on to the bar.

Joe picked it up and handed it back to him.

‘No one who’s broke buys beer on The Yabba, mate,’ he said; and, as that was what Grant had half expected or hoped would happen, he took back the note after suitable protest.

But he avoided looking at Tydon, who had begun to drink his beer already.

He must not drink too much, thought Grant, just enough, and then if he found somewhere to sleep tonight he would be in fit shape to find work, or something, tomorrow.

But how much was just enough? One beer was wonderful, so cool, so wet, so much desired by the dusty throat.

Two beers slowed down the benzedrine-inspired drumming in his body.

Three beers and his head was clearing, and then came the need for a cigarette.

‘Anybody got a cigarette?’

‘Sorry, I don’t smoke,’ said Joe.

‘Nor do I,’ said Dick.

Tydon took out his pouch and handed it to Grant.

Grant wished he hadn’t raised the question; he would give up smoking rather than ask Tydon for another cigarette, or anything else. He hated Tydon, he realised, with a clear, hard hatred.

Still, the tobacco was good.

Joe said to the publican: ‘Give us a packet of Craven A, mate.’

The publican handed the cigarettes to Joe and Joe slapped them on the bar in front of Grant.

‘Here y’are, mate. I used to smoke, I know what it’s like to be without ‘em.’

‘Look, really—thanks very much, but…I mean…’ Grant laughed foolishly.

‘Take ‘em, John. Go on, mate, a few bob’s nothing to me.’

‘But I…’ but what could he do? ‘Well, thanks very much.’

‘Forget it.’

Tydon did not make any attempt to buy beer, and it did not seem to enter the miners’ heads that he should. They tookit in turns to order the rounds of four.

Four beers and a man’s troubles appear not as grave as they did before he had one beer. But a man could still rather regret that he had no money, and a man could feel sick at being given a packet of cigarettes.

Grant made a fairly serious attempt to buy the fifth round, but Joe, helped by Dick this time, brushed him aside.

‘Well, I’ll tell you what—as soon as I get some money you must let me take you on a bash.’ That sounded banal even as he said it.

‘That’s all right, John, don’t worry about it.’

Five beers and a man begins to rather like his companions, except for Tydon.Tydon was a rat of the first water. It was remarkable that two men like the miners would associate with him. With all their faults they were men, and Tydon was a twisted, revolting creature.

‘Have you always been a miner, Joe?’

‘No, John, only since the war. Me and Dick drifted in here together and liked it, so we stuck.’

‘What did you do before the war?’

‘Boxed.’

‘Boxed?’

‘Yeah, boxed.’

‘You mean fought professionally?’

‘Yeah. Can’t you see our noses been broken?’

‘No. I hadn’t noticed.’

‘Well they have, both of them.’

Joe and Dick were so alike to Grant that he kept confusing them. They corrected him gently and good-humouredly.

‘No, I’m Dick.’

‘No, he’s Joe.’

‘You know, I used to do a bit of boxing.’

‘Did you, eh, John? Pro?’

‘Oh no, just amateur.’

‘What class?’

‘Welter—it was a few years ago, mind you.’

‘We were light-heavy. It’s a mug’s game though, bein’ a pro.’

Seven or eight or nine beers and a man is in control of himself and his destiny, no matter how bad a hangover he had when he woke up.

To round things off Joe and Dick and Tydon had a double whisky followed quickly by another beer. Grant baulked at this, but he had a final beer, to keep them company.

Then Joe—or was it Dick?—bought a couple of dozen bottles of beer and two bottles of whisky.

‘We might need a drink before we finish.’

And so they went out into the night to shoot.

It was quite dark now and there was no moon yet. Aboutten miles east of Yindee they pulled off the road along a fairly well-defined track. They were in amongst one of the large patches of scrub and scrawny trees that appear every now and then in the plain country in apparent defiance of the laws of nature.

Joe reached up and drew back a panel in the roof of the car. Then, from beneath the seat, he took out a lamp with leads attached and screwed it into a fixture, installed for the purpose, in the roof. He pushed down a switch and a wide, bright beam of light poked forward far into the black night.

All the time Dick drove at a steady forty miles an hour. He seemed to know the route quite well.

Grant could see in the beam of light pairs of coloured spots, yellow spots, blue spots, orange spots; glinting suddenly and fixedly, then flicking out. These were the eyes of the animals of the scrub, possums, sheep, foxes, dingoes, cattle, kangaroos, rabbits, rats, emus, wild cats, bandicoots, all turning their eyes into the giant white beam that pointed its way through their bush, catching a little of it and sending it back, coloured.Then they would turn their heads and bolt away and the colours would flick out.

Grant was caught in a rush of visual effects—black shadows, coloured spots, the great white beam, the cigarette of the man in the front seat, strange little glints from shinyleaves, the heavy darkness of the scrub, all held and contained by the hovering curve of the black, black, purple black sky which only the stars could penetrate.

The stars, the western stars, so many, so bright, so close, so clean, so clear; splitting the sky in remorseless frigidity; pure stars, unemotional stars; stars in command of the night and themselves; undemanding and unforgiving; excelling in their being and forming God’s incontrovertible argument against the charge of error in creating the west.

The car stopped and Dick opened a bottle of beer with his teeth.

Grant had never seen it done before and Dick explained that the technique involved pressing down with the top teeth and levering with the lower teeth.

‘You don’t want to try it,’ he said,’if you’ve got false teeth.’

Grant’s teeth were his own and in excellent condition, but he did not want to open bottles with them.

Tydon had a drink, Dick had a drink, Joe had a drink and Grant had a drink, so the bottle was empty and they drove on.

Grant was feeling relaxed and sure of himself now and he opened the breech of his rifle to load it. There was already a shell in place. That was odd. He must have reloaded after firing at the fox. He didn’t remember.That could have been dangerous. He closed the breech again and leaned forward in thewildly bumping car to see what the spotlight revealed.

‘Stand up and put your head out the top,’ said Joe.

Grant cautiously raised his head through the trap in the roof of the car and pulled the rifle through after him. With the night rushing past he leaned forward with his elbows on the roof and raised the rifle to cover the area lit by the spotlight. The car was rocking and bumping continuously and he could not keep the barrel pointed at the light, much less take a sight.

A hare broke in front of the car and ran forwards in the light.

Grant cocked the rifle and after several attempts to level it at the hare tried a wavering shot. There was nothing to indicate that the bullet landed anywhere near the hare and soon it veered off into the night.

Grant heard Joe’s voice rising from the darkness below in the car: ‘You’ll never hit anything but a ‘roo while we’re moving, son.’

‘No, I suppose not.’

It was very pleasant and refreshing up there, protruding from the vehicle like the commander of a tank. His companions seemed distant and he felt nearer to being alone than he had since he came to Bundanyabba.

Something was digging into his hip. He put his hand downand felt it. Round, cool and smooth, a sharp excrescence on one side. It was the end of a rifle barrel. He pushed it aside and it fell back against his hip.

Grant bent sideways so that his head was level with the roof of the car.

‘Joe,’ he said, ‘your rifle’s more or less pointing at me.’

‘Yeah.’ Joe was polite, but not concerned.

‘You’re sure it’s not loaded?’

‘Yeah, it’s loaded.’

‘Well—ah—isn’t it a little dicey?’

‘No, it’s got a safety catch.’

‘Oh.’

Grant stood upright and looked once more along the beam of light. But he did not feel so alone now.

He tried to arrange his body so that the rifle was not pointed in a line that would pass through his entrails, his chest and his head; but he could not manage it.

He stayed there until he was confident that nobody would connect his sitting down with the fact that he was nervous of the rifle, then he came back into the car and sat down.

The greyhound had taken up his part of the seat and he had to push it aside.

‘You needn’t worry about my rifle,’ said Joe, ‘it’s safe enough.’

‘No, I didn’t. I just thought I’d come in for a bit.’

The dog was protesting amiably against being shifted and it licked his hands.

He wished they would open some more beer.

The car swung sharply to the left and stopped.The dog thrust its head out of the window and began to growl and scrabble with its back feet. Joe stood up, thrusting his head out through the trap. Tydon and Dick craned out of the windows, levelling their rifles.

Grant, who had not seen anything yet, squeezed up through the trap beside Joe, drawing his rifle after him.

They were on the edge of a small clearing. On the other side, about a hundred feet away, five kangaroos were standing poised, watching, waiting.

‘Right!’ said Joe, and fired.

Everybody fired.

The kangaroos began hopping backwards and forwards, fretful, keeping their heads turned towards the car, their eyes orange in the spotlight.

The rifles exploded irregularly, the fast staccato of the automatic Tydon was using; the slower rhythmic beat of Joe’s repeater broken with little clashes of metal as he worked the ejector; the spasmodic cracks from the single-shot weapons Grant and Dick were firing as fast as they could reload.

All the rifles were .22s and one of the small slugs was seldom sufficient to bring down a kangaroo.

But the range was so short it was impossible to miss, and as Grant’s eager fingers worked to reload he could hear the tearing thump the bullets made as they hit flesh.

And presently the kangaroos began to fall down, even in the act of dying keeping their heads turned to the great mass of light that had burst from the bush to become the last thing they would see.

Soon they were all down except one, and it, breaking at last from the hypnotic light, hopped crookedly away into the scrub.

The night seemed wonderfully silent in the moment after the firing stopped, before the motor started, while the still air was yet heavy with the smoke of gunpowder.

They drove across the clearing and all climbed out to examine the kill. The dog had to be forcibly kept in the car.

‘Couldn’t he get the one that was wounded?’ asked Grant.

‘No, we’d never get him back if we let him go in the dark,’ said Dick.

Three of the kangaroos were dead. One had its leg broken and looked at them with undisturbed eyes.

Joe smashed its head in with a branch he broke off a dead tree.

Grant was surprised that he did not feel particularly upset at the mass carnage.They were, after all, only kangaroos.

Joe and Dick each took a carcass, ripped open the belly, spilled out the intestines and sawed off the hindquarters, complete with the long muscular tails.

Grant had never seen anything quite so sudden. In one moment the kangaroos had been quite respectable corpses; in the next they were horrible bits of animals trailing their insides.

Tydon meanwhile had his own business with the carcasses, but Grant could not look at that.

The miners dumped the quarters in a large box they had built into the car in place of the boot.

Soon they were driving off again, and the grieving night closed in on the grotesque half-carcasses protruding from the heaps of entrails, waiting for the dingoes and the foxes and the crows and the ants; tomorrow there would be only bones.

‘Why only the hindquarters?’ said Grant.

‘That’s all that’s got any meat, that and the tail,’ said Joe.

‘What do you do with it?’

‘It’s for the dogs, didn’t you know?’

Grant remembered that the miners kept racing greyhounds.

‘Does this fellow race?’

‘Gawd no! He’s just a hunger. Wouldn’t bring the runners out here, wreck ‘em.’

‘How many ‘roos do you want?’

‘Many as we can carry. What we don’t use the other blokes will.’

‘You don’t eat any of the meat yourselves—the tails, I mean.’

‘Sometimes get the old woman to make soup out of’em. Don’t like it much myself, too gamey.’

Grant saw a big grey kangaroo standing by the track.

He had his rifle cocked and levelled as the car slowed down.

The kangaroo was only twenty feet away, quite still, just outside the main glare of the light, facing out into the darkness for some reason.

It didn’t seem to even notice the car, thought Grant in the moment that the car stopped, and then with fumbling haste he fired.

The bullet went home with a thud so distinct that Grant felt as though he had thrust something into the animal with his hands.

It went down suddenly, merging into the patch of scrub in which it stood.

The patch was isolated and there was no other cover for twenty yards. Grant waited to see whether the kangaroo would break out.

A horrible noise came from the scrub, a hoarse, sucking, raucous breathing.

‘Good shot,’ said Joe.

But Grant was caught, horrified by the breathing. It bubbled and choked, and it was so loud, so very loud.

‘He won’t move now,’ said Joe, ‘I’ll get him.’

Grant still did not speak. He was frightened of what was in the patch of scrub and he didn’t know why.

As Joe walked across, the breathing stopped. It did not die away, or fade, or splutter out. It just stopped.

Joe reached the patch of scrub and halted.

Grant heard him say: ‘Well I’ll be damned.’ Then he walked through the patch, it was only about six feet square.

He walked through it twice, then turned back to the car.

Grant knew what he was going to say, but he didn’t think he could bear to hear it.

‘There’s nothing there,’ said Joe, and even his voice was subdued.

‘Rubbish,’ said Dick, ‘it couldn’t have got out. Go and get it.’

‘I tell you it’s not there!’

Grant stood erect staring, his eyes stinging, his lips trembling, a strange prickle on his skin. He knew the kangaroo wasn’t there. He didn’t know how he knew, nor why it wasn’tthere! but he knew it wasn’t there. Oh God! why wasn’t it there?

Tydon and Dick went over to look, but they couldn’t find the kangaroo either.

Grant would not leave the car.

‘Funny,’ said Dick, at last.

‘Bloody funny,’ said Joe.

Grant felt his nerves tearing.

‘You saw it go down, didn’t you?’ He wondered whether his voice was breaking.

‘Yeah. Still…things look funny in the bush at night.’ Dick spoke slowly.

‘Did you hear the noise it made?’

‘Yeah. Funny noise.’

‘Ah well!’

‘Ah well!’

Dick opened some more beer then; and because the effects of his earlier drinking were wearing off, he took a swig of whisky.

Grant refused the beer, but he took a mouthful of whisky from the bottle. He could not drink whisky neat when he was quite sober, but he had no trouble with it now. It was quite pleasant really, and very reassuring.

As they drove on, they kept passing the whisky round,because everybody felt in need of it.

Grant huddled back in his seat, drinking whisky when it was offered to him, wondering about the kangaroo he had shot.

It didn’t matter much now, in the car; but back there, in the night, under the stars…Oh God, he wished he was not drunk again.

They came across another mob of kangaroos quite soon. There were ten or twelve with one huge animal which just stood upright and looked steadfastly at the light.

One by one in answer to the demands of the cracking rifles the kangaroos dropped to the ground, or hopped lamely off into the night; all except the big one, which never moved.

‘He’s the leader of the mob,’ said Joe, as he and Grant, side by side in the trap, pumped bullets at the kangaroo. ‘He’s hit all right too.’

Dick started the car and drove over to the kangaroo. Still it stood there.

‘Don’t waste any more bullets,’ called Dick, ‘I’ll fix him!’

The kangaroo had two red stains on the white fur of its chest. One of its arms hung loose, shattered at the shoulder joint.

Dick advanced on it, his knife in his hand.

The kangaroo turned calmly to face him.

Dick made a casual movement with his knife towards its head. It swayed back slightly, resting on its tail, but made no other movement.

Joe chuckled.

‘Y’see,’ he said, ‘the ‘roo’s trying to draw him on, rip his guts out with its hind legs if he goes in close.’

The man and the kangaroo surveyed each other in the glare of the spotlight.

The miner was grinning, amused.

The kangaroo was indifferent.

This, thought Grant, was the type of situation that titillated the Romans when they matched men against exotic beasts in the arenas.

The kangaroo was taller than the man who was now so close that it was looking down at him.

Dick jumped to one side and the kangaroo shifted ground to face him. He dodged the other way, and for a moment the tip of the kangaroo’s tail came within his reach. He grabbed it, lifting it high into the air.

Unbalanced, the kangaroo flopped about, unable to control its movements, its head bent forward, helpless, without dignity.

Still holding the tail with one hand Dick leaned forward and with his knife cut deeply into the kangaroo’s leg beneath the crutch. Then he cut the other leg, and dropped the tail.

Hamstrung, the kangaroo stood motionless, its back to the light, not moving its head.

Dick grabbed it by the snout and hacked open its throat. It shuddered and sank to the ground. Dick ripped it open, turned out the entrails, cut off the hindquarters and bore them back to the car, leaving half the kangaroo lying on the spot where it had stood and faced him a minute before.

Everybody slapped Dick on the back and they quartered the other carcasses, and all drank some more beer and drove on again, leaving the night to cover the things they left behind them.

‘Isn’t that sort of thing dangerous?’ Grant found he was speaking slowly and ponderously again.

‘No, John,’ said Joe, ‘not if you know what you’re doing.’

‘Have you ever done it?’

‘Yeah, often, nothing to it really.’

‘I’d like to have a go.’

‘Would you now?’ He leaned forward.’Eh! Dick, John here reckons he wants to have a go at a ‘roo with a knife. Will we let him?’

‘Why not?’

Tydon had turned around. Grant could not see his face; his head was a black shape against the light in front. Grant thought he was grinning.

‘Why not?’ said Tydon.

And ‘Why not?’ said Grant. On they went, plunging through the night.

They flushed the next mob by the side of the track, and the night rang with rifle fire and the biting fumes filled the car. The kangaroos died or limped away, but there was one that hopped brokenly for a few yards then stopped among the trees, clearly visible from the car.

‘That’s for you, John,’ said Joe, handing Grant his knife.

Grant took the knife and clambered out through the trap to avoid struggling with the greyhound, jumped to the ground from the roof of the car and lunged towards the kangaroo standing limply in the spotlight as though it was looking into the darkness so close at hand.

Grant could hear the men in the car cheering. A rifle went off. He didn’t know where the bullet went. He was crashing through the undergrowth, tripping, stumbling.

He might have fallen on the knife, so he held it out in front of his body, like a bayonet at charge. But that felt foolish so he pointed it towards the ground.

The kangaroo did not move.

It was not until he had almost reached it that he realised it was a very small kangaroo, no more than four feet high. It was badly wounded, and just stood, looking into thedarkness beyond the spotlight’s glare.

Grant reached it, and if he had not known the men in the car were watching he would have turned back for his rifle. He stood behind the animal, wishing it would move. Then he put a hand on its shoulder. It was furry and warm. Its chest was heaving. When he was that close the animal had two heads. Janette had had two profiles the other night.

Grant leaned back and struck at the kangaroo with his knife. The blade slit a deep gash down its back and the blood came out, a thin line on the fur, black in the spotlight. Still the kangaroo did not move.

Oh God! what was he, John Grant, schoolteacher and lover, doing out here under the contemptuous stars butchering this warm grey beast?

He leaned forward and drove the knife into the white fur on the kangaroo’s chest. The blade went in easily, deeply, but the kangaroo would not die.

Its flesh closed hard around the blade and Grant had to drag it out.

Sobbing, he drove the knife into its chest and its back again and again, and it stood there, mute, unprotesting, but it would not die.

Grant stood away for a moment, drew his hands across his eyes and heard the yells of encouragement from the car.

He put his left arm across the kangaroo’s shoulder and pulled its head back and began hacking away at its throat. In time the blood gushed out, warm on his hands, and he could feel the head pulling further and further back until at last the kangaroo shuddered terribly and fell to the ground.

Grant grabbed it by the tail and began hauling it back to the car.

And as he stumbled in front of his load he pulled down the shutters in his mind and just walked and dragged and drew the blanket of drunkenness over his being again.

Being drunk is warm and soft and there is no pain and it does not really matter about kangaroos that are shot and breathe horribly and disappear in the night, or about little kangaroos that you cut to pieces before they die.

Grant killed many kangaroos that night and once even made a disastrous attempt to eviscerate one before he was sure it was dead; and it flopped about with its entrails spilling.

Everybody laughed, and they laughed again because Grant was covered in blood and they drank all the whisky and all the beer and their shooting became wilder.

Someone fired a bullet through the roof of the car and someone else fired one through the windscreen, and everybody laughed again.

Their shouts and their laughter and their bottles and their bullets and the roar of the car’s engine and the crashing of its wheels through the scrub were their contribution to the sounds of the night. The box at the rear of the car filled and overflowed with hindquarters; scattered in an erratic pattern of their progress were the half-carcasses; and in dark glades and dry creek beds kangaroos stood with bullets in their bodies waiting to die without comment.

Dear God, but man was a powerful thing and another drink would make him feel a lot better. Grant was leaning heavily on the greyhound. It didn’t mind.

Soon after all the liquor had gone Dick turned the car back, and weaving a little, drove to the road. It did not take long because they had been driving around in a circle most of the time.

The hotel at Yindee had anticipated their return and was still open. Hotels seldom close in the west.

They all went in and drank beer, and Grant did not know who paid, or cared. Everything that had happened to him that night was being re-created in his brain in spasms, little bursts of imagined action, one after the other, very quickly; the shooting, the killing, the driving, the running, the drinking; bright images, coloured images; they said you could not think in colour. They were wrong. There’s a time when yourmind flashes colour, green, orange and fire. No, that was wrong too. That was the dawn. Incredible colours on the low horizon.

The car must be moving. Now there was another hotel.

He could not see much any more, but he was aware of people and things. They were terribly far away, near the outside of him. But he had retreated far inside, so far inside that a great margin of blackness lay between himself and the outside of his head.

But he was there, a little bright flashing light, that was the core; the darkness was the flesh and the shell was his face and the top of his head and the back of his head.

They were moving, and then he had arrived and he stayed.

Nothing for a time.

Then, Oh God! The light was bright and this could not be.Tydon. But the light went out. Then he went out.That was terrible. It should not have happened.

Nothing for a time.

Oh God! The light was bright and this could not be, again. It was all to do with being drunk because this could not, did not, happen to John Grant, schoolteacher and something. Tydon was a foul thing. But so was John Grant. Oh God, that light! But it was going out. And it went out. But what had happened before was terrible. It should not have happened.

It could not have happened. It had happened twice. And then nothing for a long time.

•

When he awoke he did not know where he was or when it was; he knew only that if he moved the pain would start.

For a time he lay secure in the calm that precedes the agonies of a hangover.

Then the tortures began to happen to him, approaching stealthily, penetrating deeply and swelling.

He was sick.

Memory struggled within him and deliberately he subdued it. But it came back.

Slowly he raised his head. He was back in Tydon’s hut.That was not really a surprise. He could see bloodstains on his arms.

Last night’s orgy flitted back to him in hideous little cameos. But he was too sick to know remorse yet.

That bare, whitish, heaving thing there? It was his chest. He raised his head a little more. He was naked. He turned his head. His clothes were in a heap on the floor. Tydon was lying on another stretcher, asleep, covered by a sheet of some sort.

Grant let his head fall back. He had so many things toregret and so little strength to regret with. Perhaps he could sleep?

But now the arid wakefulness that comes to the drunkard was upon him and he knew he had to face a day of living.

Suddenly—what about those spasms of light in the night?

An awful sickness washed over him. What had happened to him in the night? Something appalling had happened to him, but what was it?

Driving thought and memory back, Grant sat up quickly. And the pain started flooding his mind in blinding waves.

Never mind, while his head hurt he could not think. But get out of here. Get out of here now.

He rolled his legs off the stretcher and stood up. He felt as though small leaden weights had been sewn to his intestines, his eyes, his nerve-ends. Oh God! the pain in his head.

Slowly, but not caring whether he woke Tydon, Grant dressed. His clothes were stiff with blood and they smelt.What had happened to that kangaroo that had disappeared after he had shot it? Things half remembered and terribly feared, shrieked at him; tears of mystic terror rimmed his eyes. And that blasted, damnable, bloody light in the night. What had that been? What had happened?

Careful, Grant, careful, he didn’t really want to remember.

Tydon woke up as he was lacing his shoes.

‘Going?’

‘Yes.’The word seemed to come from a long way away.

‘Where?’

‘Sydney.’The thought formed in his mind as he answered the question.

‘How?’

His jaws did not seem to be working properly and he did not answer; in any case he didn’t know.

He was not looking at Tydon, but he knew Tydon was smiling at him.

‘Want a drink before you go?’

Grant shook his head, slowly.

‘Food?’

‘No.’

He could not see very clearly and it took him a long time to tie his shoelaces.

At last he stood up and looked about him for the door of the hut.

‘Don’t forget your gun,’ said Tydon.

Grant turned and looked at him, confused. He thought Tydon looked like an emaciated rat thrusting his face out from under the sheet. Dear God, what had he done last night?

‘What gun?’

‘The boys made you a present of the gun.’Tydon noddedtowards the rifle lying on the floor near Grant’s feet.

Grant eased himself down and grasped the rifle.

Tydon was saying something else, but Grant could not understand and didn’t listen. He walked to the door, shut his eyes, opened the door and stepped out into the full light of day.

He stood outside the hut and let the door close behind him; stood with his eyes shut waiting for the first feverish attack of the heat to subside to the dull, bruising blast that would not cease until dusk.

He half opened his eyes, looked around until he found the direction of the city and began to walk, head down, doggedly, grasping the rifle in one hand, not thinking.

It was only about half a mile to the first houses, and it did not take as long as Grant thought it did for him to walk there. Not once did he look back to Tydon’s hut.

He plodded down the street, between the houses, not caring whether anyone thought his appearance strange.

A slight breeze was blowing, and the dust from the waste heaps beside the mines swirled knee-deep along the streets, like a drifting, shifting, low-lying cloud.

Grant’s face was taut and dry. People never seem to sweat while they’re in the sun of the west; the beads of moisture dry up as they ooze through the skin.

The dust caked on Grant’s lips. His mouth was an arid gapin his head. Once he almost thought of Robyn, but she did not really exist any more; there was nothing but his pain and the heat and the dust eddying around his knees and the necessity to get to Sydney.

He stopped, transferred the rifle to his left hand and felt in the fob pocket of his trousers. Slowly he drew out his money; the crinkled ten-shilling note, the two-shilling piece, the sixpence and the penny.

Clutching the money in his hand he began to walk again.

In the main street people looked at him, unshaven, befouled, his clothes darkened with blood. People shifted about him almost on the outskirts of his consciousness. He walked straight along the footpath and people melted away in front of him.

Then one did not melt away.

Grant stopped, his nose almost against a uniform shirt. He raised his eyes. There was a face under a peaked cap. It was a policeman.

‘Look here, John, you can’t go carrying a rifle through the street like that.’

The policeman seemed to know him.

He brought his eyes to bear on the face. Yes. He knew the policeman too. It was the one he had met the first night in Bundanyabba, so long ago.

He tried to say something, but he only croaked.

‘Here, show us it, son.’ The rifle was plucked from his hands. The policeman was doing something to it.Then he pressed it back into Grant’s hands in two pieces, the stock and the barrel.

‘There, that’s all right now, put this in your pocket.’The policeman gave Grant something small and hard. He looked at it. It was the rifle bolt.

‘What’s the matter with you, John?’

Grant reached down into himself and brought out:’Been shooting.’

That made everything clear to the policeman.

‘Ah! Bit hungover, eh?’

Grant allowed his head to drop, then raised it again. Surely the policeman knew that meant ‘yes’. He didn’t have to speak, did he?

‘You need a hair of the dog, mate—come on.’

The furtive cunning that Grant now knew in himself turned in the void of his mind and he managed to almost grin as he said: ‘Sorry, mate, but I’m out of cash at the moment.’

‘What’s that got to do with it?’ said the policeman, as Grant had known he would. ‘Come on.’

There’s nowhere in Bundanyabba that’s far from a hotel, and Grant had just time to slip his money back into his fobpocket before he was again leaning on a bar, his foot rising automatically, feeling for the footrail.

The relief he knew he would find in beer stimulated him in prospect and he tried to drag the policeman’s name out of his memory. Not that it mattered much: ‘mate’ would do.

‘Couple of schooners, Joyce,’ said the policeman,’me mate’s in a bad way.’

‘He looks it,’ said Joyce, whom Grant could not see because he did not turn his eyes from the bar.

The policeman said something then that seemed to require an answer; but Grant could not absorb it.

‘Sorry, mate,’ he said,’I’m feeling a bit crook. I don’t get you.’

The policeman laughed.

‘You must have done a lot of shooting.’

The beer came. Nausea and thirst warred briefly in Grant; and thirst won, thirst and the need for something that would make his body something he could bear to be with.

His fingers were shaking as he curled them around the cold wet glass. He brought it to his face and breathed the coldness from the froth-crowned liquid.

Then he absorbed the beer into his racked frame, quickly to kill the nausea, then slowly to feel it caressing through his body, sending soft broken waves of coolness out from his stomach. Then it was all gone.

‘Better?’ said the policeman.

‘Better,’ said Grant. ‘Thanks…Jock.’

‘Have another?’

‘Oh… I don’t really like to…I…’

‘Ah bulsh, you can buy me a few next time you see me. Two more thanks, Joyce.’

Grant felt terribly weak standing waiting for the next beer. It was probably quite some time since he had eaten; he could not remember when. He was not too sure what day it was, but he thought it was Monday. He didn’t much care what time it was.

‘I thought you were pulling out of The Yabba on Saturday?’

‘Yes. I was.’ But that had been in another world, another life.

‘What went wrong?’

‘Oh, I…got involved.’ He wasn’t up to talking yet, nor to thinking, and if that beer did not come quickly he would probably fall at the policeman’s feet.

It came and Grant drank it quickly, without pausing. There was no pleasure in this; this was for sheer survival.

The policeman said something to him again, but he did not know what it was.

‘Jock, you’ve damn near saved my life. How aboutcompleting the job by giving me a cigarette?’

While he was rolling the cigarette Joyce came up and said ‘Same again, boys?’ and Grant absentmindedly ignored her so the two schooners reappeared filled. The policeman was getting it free, anyway.

Half the third schooner, then Grant got a light from the policeman and let the smoke roll around his mouth, up behind his nose, then took it down into his lungs. It made him feel a little ill, but a man’s metabolism could be balanced by beer and tobacco whether he liked them much or not.

Clarity descended upon Grant, but he knew that it would not last an hour unless he became drunk, and he would not become drunk.

‘Jock, where could I get a shower?’

‘Well… at your pub, I suppose.’

‘I’m not in a pub.’

‘Wherever you’re staying then.’

‘I’m not staying anywhere.’

‘I don’t get you, mate.’

‘Look, Jock, I’m in a mess. I’m broke. I want to get back to Sydney, and before I go I want to have a shower and clean myself up a bit. Can you help me?’

The policeman looked at him, wondering, then said,’Ah, yes, I can help you, John. Hey, Joyce!’And when Joyce cameup:‘Can my mate here have a shower upstairs?’

Joyce looked at Grant a moment, doubtfully, but then, because the policeman had asked, ‘Oh, yes. That’s all right, I suppose. Long as he doesn’t mess the place up.’

‘I won’t.’ Grant looked away from the barmaid’s face and saw his suitcases standing against the wall.

‘Oh!’ he said, ‘they’re mine.’

Joyce and the policeman looked at the suitcases, then at each other, then at Grant.

‘Are they?’ said Joyce.

‘Yes. I must have left them here yesterday…no, not yesterday… the other day.’

‘They’ve been here since Saturday.’

God! what day was it?

‘That’s it. I was in here drinking with a man.Tim, his name was. Do you know Tim?’

The barmaid looked at the policeman.

‘I don’t know any Tim,’ she said.’Anyway, I wasn’t on, on Saturday.’

The policeman said:’Anyhow, if John here says they’re his, they’re his.What’s in them, John?’

‘Books in that one and clothes in the other.’

The policeman went over and tried the lock on one of the cases. It came open.

‘Books,’ said the policeman, re-locked the case and came back to the bar. ‘Didn’t doubt you, of course, John.’

Grant did not care. He finished his beer.

‘Thanks a lot, Jock. I’ll get up and take that shower now. Be seeing you.’

He picked up the cases and the dismantled rifle and walked towards the door leading to what seemed to be the residential section of the hotel. He stopped and looked back. The policeman and the barmaid were both looking at him.

‘Where are the bathrooms?’ he said.

‘Out the door, up the stairs and turn left.’ Joyce was obviously regretting having given Grant permission to use the bathroom. She turned enquiringly to the policeman as Grant left the bar.

In the bathroom he stripped off his clothes and turned his head in disgust at the smell of his own body.

The hot water tap gave him a drizzle of lukewarm water, and he stood under it, scraping his skin with a fragment of soap he found on the side of the bath. It was hard to raise a lather with the water that came from the Bundanyabba mains.

He turned on the cold tap, and the temperature of the water lowered very slightly, but he stood under it for several minutes, hoping for some refreshment from it.

He did not have a towel so he shaved standing naked infront of the mirror allowing the water to drain off his body. He cut himself three times with the razor and almost cried when he saw the blood, not with pain, with helplessness.

Then he dressed himself in clean underclothes, socks, shirt, trousers, shoes and even added a tie. His other clothes he jammed in a bundle in a corner of his suitcase. His money he put in his fob pocket.

He combed his hair and looked at himself. He was all right except for his face; it was bloated and grey and his lips were trembling. Tears seemed to be forming in his eyes.

‘My God, Grant, you’re in a bad way.’

The policeman had left the bar when Grant came back with his suitcases and his rifle, and the barmaid looked at him without speaking.

‘If I follow the main road out I get on to the eastern road, don’t I?’ said Grant.

‘The eastern road?’

‘The road that leads to the east, to the coast.’ Every word was a job of work.

Grant walked out of the hotel. The footpath was still almost hidden by the drifting dust. He looked along the glaring length of the street and his resolution evaporated. He went back into the hotel.

‘Is there a bus that goes out that way?’

‘Which way?’

‘Out to the eastern road.’

‘The 416 goes out there.’ She spoke as though that were something any fool would know.

‘Where do I get it?’

‘At the bus stop.’

Oh God, this dreary woman.

‘Yes, but where is the bus stop?’

‘Just outside the door.’

Did she have to speak as though he were an idiot or worse; still, he was, wasn’t he?

‘Thanks. Could I have six boxes of matches please?’

‘It’ll cost a shilling.’

‘That’s all right.’

Grant thought he heard her mutter: ‘I thought you were broke,’ as she turned away to get the matches.

She held out her hand for the money before she gave him the matches.

‘And a bottle of beer please.’

The beer cost three and sixpence. He had eight and a penny left.

In a shop near the hotel he bought a meat pie for a shilling and packed it, in its brown paper bag, in the case with his clothes along with the beer and the matches.

He still felt frail and leaden in one, but the change of clothes had removed some of his sense of degradation. And as yet he did not have to try very hard to stop his mind prying back into what had happened over the past few days.

The bus took him to the outskirts of the city on the western side, near the sewage treatment works. The fare was one and sixpence.

He paid the driver and stepped down from the bus on to the road and found that the glare had almost gone; dusk was setting in. That meant it must have been about seven o’clock. Where was his watch, anyway?

He waited on the roadside until the bus had turned round and headed back to the city, trying to remember what his intention had been. It had seemed fairly clear back in the hotel.

The sewage treatment works was the only building near, and he couldn’t see any people about. A ditch had been dug along the side of the road for some purpose or another and a sort of rampart of earth had been thrown up. Grant clambered over it with his cases and his rifle and slid down into the ditch.

From a suitcase he took a travelling rug which someone had given him once and he’d never used before. He spread it on the ground and sat down.

Taking the bottle of beer out of the case he looked at it, and wondered how to open it. Hadn’t he seen someone opening bottles with their teeth? He couldn’t do that. He took out his penny and worked on the top with it, levering it off a piece at a time. It took a long while and once or twice he thought he was going to cry with the sheer effort. But it came off at last.

He drank half the beer fairly quickly, it was already warm, and then unwrapped the pie and took a bite.The pastry was yellow and dry and the meat was a glutinous brown mess. He chewed on the mouthful but could not swallow it and eventually spat it out, wrapped the remains in the brown paper bag, drank the rest of the beer and lay down.

It was almost quite dark and the stars were breaking through the purple of the sky, building up into an immense curved blanket that lay over him, quite intimately.

He wondered whether he would be able to sleep. He could feel nerves throughout his body twitching and pulling and every few moments he would start as though he had been frightened.

Strange, he thought, that he did not particularly want a cigarette. Cigarettes were round and white and they made your mouth taste foul if you smoked too many. His mouth tasted foul now. Robyn had a wonderfully shaped mouth. Shewore a white skirt at tennis. He was about to serve and he stood poised on the baseline. He tossed the ball into the air, swung his racquet in a perfect movement and sent the ball sizzling over the net in an unplayable shot to win the game. His opponent did not even have time to move. A great big man, he must have been thirty feet tall and terribly broad, was towering over the nets. He was dressed in tennis shorts and a fawn sleeveless pullover.Was it fawn or yellow? You didn’t dream in colour.

And then he was completely asleep and the stars moved across the sky on their prescribed courses and the little animals of the night snuffled around him and then scuttled away, alarmed at his heavy breathing and restless movements.

Grant woke at dawn feeling wonderfully refreshed, until he moved. Then he realised that he was very weak and shaky. Still it was so much better than yesterday.

He was enormously hungry and when he unfolded the meat pie he found it was not so bad after all. But the yellow pastry was hard to take without something to drink. He was shockingly thirsty.

He finished the pie, packed the rug in the suitcase and forced the pieces of the rifle in too. He picked up the empty beer bottle, rummaged around until he found the top and clambered up on to the road.

It must have been about half past five and the sun was tossing hot waves on to the plain, preparing the way for the full tide of heat which would rise with the day.

Grant left his cases by the side of the ditch and went over to the sewage treatment works with his beer bottle. There did not seem to be anybody about, so he filled the bottle from a water tap, took a long drink, filled it again and jammed the top on.

The first car to come past was a big black Buick, and it rushed by spraying him with dust, his hand lifted foolishly.

Ten minutes later a utility came along and drew up as he gestured towards the east.

‘I’m only going to Yindee, mate,’ said the driver, a thin, stringy man with a very brown face and a much chewed cigarette butt attached to his lower lip.

‘That would be a help, thanks.’

‘Throw your bags in the back.’

Grant took his water bottle with him into the cabin of the utility because he was not too sure about the top. He sat with it between his knees as the utility jerked forward and began bouncing through the mist of dust which still hung around the road to mark the passing of the Buick.

‘Where are you heading, mate?’ asked the driver.

‘Going to Sydney.’

The driver said nothing for a time, his eyes squinting against the white glare of the road.

‘That’s a long way, mate,’ he said at length. ‘Gonna hitch all the way.’

‘I hope so.’

‘You’ll have your work cut out once you get out from Yelonda. Still, I suppose you’ll make it. There’s always a truck or two goes past in a week.You might be lucky and get a run through to the coast.’

‘I hope so.’

They were silent, the driver with his thoughts on whatever the smaller farmers of the west think about, and Grant trying hard not to remember the last time he came along this road.

A truck or two a week the driver had said. And this was Tuesday, he supposed. He was fairly sure it was Tuesday, but he didn’t like to ask.

The driver spat the stained cigarette butt out of the window and with considerable dexterity rolled another cigarette, keeping the car steadily on the road the while. He passed the pouch to Grant.

‘Smoke?’

‘Thanks.’ Grant had been trying to forget the dry brittle ache in the mouth and throat that a heavy smoker experiences when deprived of tobacco for any period.

He rolled a generous cigarette and lit it.

The smoke made him feel a little dizzy and sick but he took it down deep into his lungs and let it out slowly.

The sweat was running freely down his face now and his clothes were damp. He felt distinctly more healthy than he had since he had first met Tim Hynes, except that he seemed terribly nervous. His body was constantly taut and he found himself taking deep breaths, trying to relax, but not succeeding.

He was quite clear-headed, but his thoughts came very quickly, in little repetitive bursts.

And he didn’t like himself.

‘Your best bet,’ said the driver, ‘would be to hang around the pubs at Yelonda. You’ll probably find a truck going through from there.’

‘Thanks, I’ll try that.’The devil he’d try that. He’d wait on the road and if necessary die on the blasted road before he’d go into a pub again.

‘How come you’re hitchhiking to Sydney?’

‘Broke,’ said Grant.

‘But it only costs a few quid in the train, mate.’

‘I’m broker than that.’

A pause. The utility swayed in the soft dust of the road. The sun was high now and the pastel colours of morning had dried up; there was just white glare.

‘Haven’t you got any money at all?’

‘About five bob,’ said Grant, cheerfully. Now that he was definitely on his way to Sydney the fact that he had no money did not seem to be quite such a tragedy.

The driver looked at him long enough to endanger the utility. He swerved back on to the road.

‘How far you come?’

‘Just from The Yabba.’

Another pause. The driver contemplated the white road intently.

‘You’re gonna be mighty hungry before you get to Sydney.’

‘I don’t know. I’ve got a rifle. I’ll pick up some game.

‘Hmm.’

The driver did not speak again until they were pulling up at the Yindee Hotel. Then he said:’I’ll be dropping you a mile up the road. Come, and I’ll buy you a drink.’

‘No thanks,’ said Grant, too abruptly.

‘My shout,’ said the driver.

‘No thanks, I’m off it,’ said Grant.

‘Well I’m going to have one,’ said the driver, a little annoyed, and stopped the utility outside the hotel.

By the time Grant had hauled his bags out of the back of the vehicle the driver’s spate of ill-humour had dissipated.

‘Come on,’ he said, ‘I’ll buy you a drink.You’ll need it.’

‘Thanks all the same,’ said Grant,’but I’m off it.Thanks for the ride.’

He picked up his cases and began walking east.

The driver looked after him as though he thought he was insane.

‘And to bloody hell with you,’ he said, and went into the hotel for his drink.

Grant, wilting under the sun, walked a couple of hundred yards up the road until he came to a desiccated gum tree which offered a pretence of shade.

He sat down on one of his cases and looked westward along the road. There was no suggestion of the tight swirl of dust which would have meant a vehicle, only the drifting cloud the utility had raised, settling gently back on the plain.

He prised the top off his bottle and drank some of the warm water. It was probably about noon, and he wondered again what had happened to his watch.

Off to the right was a line of scrub indicating the course of a creek. It would undoubtedly be dry, but he might pick up a rabbit there. Food was an absolute necessity, so he had better take the risk of losing a lift and see what he could find.

He carried his cases a few yards away from the road and took out the pieces of the rifle. The mechanism puzzled him briefly then he laid the barrel in the butt groove and screwedin the holding pin. Then he slipped the bolt into the breech, cocked it and heard it click home when he pulled the trigger.

There were plenty of cartridges in the pockets of his safari jacket. He took out a handful, shuddering at the feel of the blood-stiffened cloth, and placed one in the breech, leaving the rifle uncocked.

The creek bed was only a hundred yards or so away and he walked quickly across, his feet breaking the sparse and brittle blades of dead grass.

This was not wise, walking out here in the sun; God send he saw a rabbit or some sort of game reasonably soon.

He saw one almost immediately on the opposite side of the creek, sitting up looking at him, its ears erect and quivering.

Dropping to one knee Grant cocked the rifle and raised it to his shoulder. One eye closed, the other squinting against the glare, he tried to line the rabbit up in the sights, but they swayed and jumped and he realised he could not keep his hands still enough.

He lay down and the grass stalks pricked his body through his clothes, but he could hold the rabbit in the rifle sights. It was still bolt upright, its ears moving gently.

Holding his breath, he squeezed the trigger.

The report was slight, lost in the echoless plains, and therabbit leaped high in the air and fell over backwards.

Grant stood up quickly; and blackness swamped out of his chest towards his head, but stopped and receded. He had better keep out of the sun, he thought; he should have a hat of some sort.

The creek bed was dry, as he had supposed, and quite shallow, and he crossed it to pick up his rabbit.

It was rotten with myxomatosis.

He held it, wondering whether he could salvage anything from the carcass, then threw it away with a twinge of disgust.

He could feel his confidence draining away as he looked along the creek bed, red on the sides where the underlying clay had been exposed and white with thick dust on the bottom.

But having come so far he might as well walk a few yards more, and he jumped down and began to follow the path of dust which traced out the course the water took when it ran for a week once a year, if times were good.

His feet made no sound in the dust and he came upon a second rabbit around the first bend. It was only twenty feet away and seemed too surprised to move.

Even with his shaking hands he could not miss and he raised the rifle to his shoulder, lined up on the rabbit’s head and squeezed the trigger.

The bolt clicked home, but there was no report. He had forgotten to reload.

Grant had done quite a deal of shooting, and he stood motionless for a moment, then slowly lowered the rifle, drew back the bolt, ejected the spent cartridge, inserted a live one, cocked the rifle, and raised it again, all without startling the rabbit.

Then he shot it through the head.

It was lean, but had no visible trace of disease about its body. Grant carried it by the back legs across to his suitcases and then moved under the tree again.

There was still no sign of a vehicle on the road; the utility had gone from in front of the hotel now. He must have missed hearing it while he was in the creek-bed.

He took his razor from the suitcase and extracted the blade. Holding the rabbit on the ground he slit the skin around the neck and peeled it off the body like a glove. Another slit and he emptied the entrails on to the ground.

Immediately swarms of blowflies descended and Grant moved a few yards away to hack off the rabbit’s head. But the leaden beat of the sun sent him back under the scant shade of the tree so he tossed a few handfuls of dust over the skin and the entrails to discourage the blowflies and flung the head well away.

He had no trouble lighting a fire because the tree bark, dead grass and a few dead branches had long since been emptied of any vestige of moisture.

As the fire died down he dropped the rabbit into the centre of it. He did not expect to enjoy it, anyway. All he wanted was food with at least the semblance of being cooked.

When it began to char he pulled it out of the fire and broke it in half. One half he wrapped in an old shirt and stuffed into his suitcase. The other he began to gnaw, squatting by the empty road.

The meat was still half raw, lean and stringy and would have been unpalatable even if it had been allowed to hang. But he chewed through it, wishing only that he had thought to provide himself with salt. That would not have cost much. He might buy some in the next town since he proposed to live like this for some time.

Some time—how long was some time? There was really nothing to indicate that he would ever stop living like this, except that he would eventually run out of bullets.

He cleaned the bones of the rabbit conscientiously and sat down with his back against the trunk of the tree looking down the road towards Bundanyabba.

Despair settled on him like a fog as the day wore on and the colours that Aborigines like to paint appeared on theplains when the sun sank down towards the horizon.

He sat there, longing for a cigarette, trying to stave off the nagging hopeless anxiety of the hysteric; desperately trying not to think of the past or the future.

Several times he took swigs from the bottle of now almost hot water. He thought of going back to the hotel to fill it, but he was afraid he might buy cigarettes if he saw them in front of him, or beer.

He’d come forty miles in one day and he had hundreds of miles to go. He would take a month on the journey if he maintained this rate. A month on the road with five or six shillings in his pocket. And it might be longer.

And when he got to Sydney? But he would not think about that. Anything that happened there must of necessity be better than being in Bundanyabba.

A spiral of dust in the purple dimness underlying the flaring orange of the sunset, and he began to take the rifle apart. It wouldn’t do to beg a ride brandishing a rifle. He packed the pieces in a suitcase along with the now empty bottle and waited, wondering whether the car, truck, utility, whatever it was, would turn off on some improbable excuse for a side-road and disappear, a fading swirl of dust in the gathering darkness.

In any case it was almost certain to stop at the hotel. He doubted whether there was a driver within five hundred milesof Bundanyabba who could navigate his vehicle past a hotel without stopping.

Soon he could see that it was a truck, bouncing fast along the pitted road. The fact that it was a truck meant nothing. Many of the small landholders kept quite large trucks to take their produce to Bundanyabba and they used them as cars at other times. The only vehicles that would be going any great distance would probably be semitrailers. Still, another fifty miles would be something.

From the time he first saw it, twenty minutes passed before the truck reached the hotel. It didn’t stop there.

Grant started flagging it when it was still fifty yards away. The driver slowed down and Grant could see him peering out at him. Even in the west a man gives a little thought to whether or not he should pick up a stranger by the road at nightfall. But Grant looked all right and the driver stopped.

Grant walked over and put his head up to the offside window of the driver’s cabin.

‘Could I get a lift as far as you’re going?’ he said.

‘Where you going, mate?’ said the driver, a round-faced, unshaven man of about thirty-five.

‘Sydney, eventually,’ said Grant, apologetically.

‘I’m only going as far as Yelonda, mate.’

‘That’d be a help.’

Again the driver pondered, keeping his eyes steadily on Grant. Then, apparently reaching some conclusion:’All right, hop in.’

The driver switched on his lights as they moved off, for the darkness was almost complete.

The sound of the engine and the feel of the broken leather of the seat soothed Grant after the long hours under the tree hearing only the inexplicable rustlings in the dead grass and the occasional unpleasing cry of a crow.

‘Where you travelling from?’ said the driver.

‘The Yabba.’

‘Been on the road long?’

‘Only started today.’

‘In trouble?’

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘In trouble with the cops?’

‘No. Not at all. Why should you think that?’

‘City feller like yourself, carrying bags, wearing those clothes. Stands to reason you ain’t travelling this way because you like it.’ Then, conspiratorially: ‘They watch the trains and aeroplanes, don’t they?’

‘Possibly. I wouldn’t know. But I assure you I’m not in trouble with the police.’

‘You say you’re not. I believe you. It’s your business, anyway. Shouldn’t have asked. Sorry.’

Grant could feel an unaccountable sensation of utter guilt.

‘No really, I’m just thumbing my way to Sydney because I’m broke.’

‘Sure, all right; you say it, I believe you.’

Both fell silent, Grant dumbfounded, the driver sceptical.

Not that it mattered, thought Grant, in fact it was rather amusing. Some day it would make part of a good story he could tell about his adventures in the west. But no, perhaps it would not do to tell a story about his adventures in the west.

He realised then that for a time his mind had stopped making determined darts back into the events of the past few days, but now it was searching, delving, remembering; and there were things that had better not be remembered. He felt a little sick clutch of fear—the noise of the kangaroo that disappeared. Strange the way he kept thinking about that. It could be explained quite easily, probably. But then there had been those bursts of light that night and…No!He would not think back.

‘How far is it to Yelonda?’ he said suddenly.

‘’Bout forty miles, I’d say. Take us about two hours.’

‘What do you reckon my chances are of getting a lift through to the coast from there?’

‘Fair, I’d say. Just fair. Your best bet would be to hang around the pubs. You’ll find somebody going through eventually.’

Yelonda duly appeared as a dusting of lights on the plain ahead. It had been a town which flourished when paddlesteamers had run up and down the Harden River, almost halfway across the continent when there was water in the river-bed. But the paddle-steamers had not run for forty years and Yelonda had died thirty-nine years ago.Was it forty years ago the paddle-steamers had stopped? He must check that in case one of his pupils ever asked him. Dear God, his pupils. It was strange the way he could forget things, and then they would leap into his thoughts so violently as to almost hurt…and before he saw his pupils again?

But at that moment the truck was stopping in Yelonda and the immediate problem was how to continue the journey to Sydney.

Yelonda was just a few broken-down houses interspersed with hotels. Half the people wandering around the dim streets were either Aborigines or half-castes.

The Harden River wound its way past the edge of the town, dark, narrow and deep by the standard of western rivers. Grant resolved to go downstream a little in the morning to bathe and shave.

The driver stood by while Grant pulled his suitcases out of the back of the truck, then:’Come and have a drink,’ more as a statement than an invitation.

‘No thanks,’ said Grant, ‘I’m off it.’

‘Off it? You mean you don’t drink?’

‘I’m just not drinking for the moment.’

‘I can see that; what I said was, let’s go and have one.’

‘Thanks, mate,’ said Grant patiently, ‘but I’ve given up drinking for a while.’

‘Well, I’ll be b——,’ said the driver;’you mean you won’t

have a drink with a man after he’s given you a ride for fifty bloody miles.’

Convinced now that poverty was no bar to drinking in the west, Grant did not raise the point. He shrugged in some embarrassment and murmured:’Sorry, mate, but I’m just not drinking.’

‘Well you can bloody well go and get ——,’ in tones of

complete contempt, and he turned and was lost behind the batwing doors of a hotel.

Peculiar trait of the western people, thought Grant, that you could sleep with their wives, despoil their daughters, sponge on them, defraud them, do almost anything that would mean at least ostracism in normal society, and they would barely seem to notice it. But refuse to drink withthem and you immediately became a mortal enemy. What the hell? He didn’t even want to think about the west or its people and their peculiarities. Let them be. Once he was in Sydney, who knew, he might never come back.

He was walking towards the river with his suitcases. Tonight he would camp under the bridge, bathe early in the morning and walk out on to the road a way to try to pick up some more game, then wait for a lift again. By the time he had walked a hundred yards he was saturated with sweat and he put his cases down to rest.

Across the way was the Yelonda picture theatre, a comparatively vivid patch of light in the dull street. People milled around outside or dived across the street for a few drinks during the interval.

A poster glued to the front of the wooden hall which passed for a theatre advertised some obscure movie that Grant seemed to recall as a product of the war years.

He stood looking at the picture crowd and wondered why the celluloid image of American culture should have penetrated so far into this desolate land. Strange it was that these withered and weathered people of the west should be fascinated by some American director’s concept of war; that they should pay to come from their wooden homes to sit in discomfort for hours, dripping sweat, to watch a badlyscratched film of purely formal heroics.

Still, let them be, let them be. City people went to B class movies too, so what the hell? He turned to pick up his cases and was suddenly obsessed by the word ‘Sydney’.

Sydney.

SYDNEY, in large capital letters.

He shook his head and realised he was reading the word.

It was on the door of the cabin of a semitrailer parked in the main street of Yelonda.

It was the last line in a block of printing on the door. Grant stood back.

J. CARRINGTON

Haulier

7 HOLDEN STREET

WYTON

SYDNEY

A road transport might well go through to the city in less than four days. Four days: dear God, he could go without food for that long, and anyway what money he had would carry him through. Four days, say at the most five.

Grant chewed his lower lip, trying to control the hope he realised depended entirely on the driver of the semitrailer for fulfilment.

Where was the driver?

He looked around. The nearest hotel to the vehicle was the one across from the picture theatre. It was reasonably certain that the driver would be in there. But if he were not and Grant was in there looking for him he might come back and drive off. On the other hand he might be spending the night in the hotel and Grant would face many hours of waiting by the roadside.

He decided to try the hotel. He could keep an eye on the road in case the driver came back.

Leaving his cases where they were he hurried across to the hotel. It was crowded now with people from the theatre, but they would all leave in a few moments when the interval ended.

In fact, as Grant pushed through the batwing doors into the yellow, smoky light of the bar, he heard a handbell ringing outside, and the men began to drink their beer at a gulp and make for the doors. Soon there were only about twenty left in the bar and Grant peered at each, trying to decide which would be a professional transport driver.

He stood in a corner where he could see the semitrailer and several of the drinkers turned and stared at him. Strangers were not all that common in Yelonda.

To Grant all the men in the bar seemed alike, sunblastedwith blank eyes. He could see nothing about any of them that suggested a transport driver.

He went across to the bar and when the bartender was down at his end asked: ‘Any idea who owns that semitrailer across the road?’

The bartender, a short man in a waistcoat who looked as though he might own the hotel, stared at Grant. Then he turned and bellowed to the bar in general: ‘Gent here wants to know who owns the semitrailer across the road,’ and went on with the business of pulling beer.

Everybody in the bar turned and looked at the ‘gent’, then a heavily built man of about fifty detached himself from the wall he had been leaning against, drinking alone, and advanced on Grant.

Grant felt his hopes subsiding as the man came nearer. His face was gross and heavy and he had small pig-eyes. He stood in front of Grant and looked at him enquiringly, but said nothing.

‘You…you own the semitrailer?’ said Grant at length, conscious that everyone in the bar was still staring, and listening.

‘What of it?’ The voice seemed to come from somewhere down in the man’s stomach rather than his throat.

‘Nothing…just that I…I wanted to see if I could get a lift.’

The man looked at him blankly, presumably thinking, but giving no indication of it, then: ‘Where you going?’

‘Right through…to the city I mean…I’m trying to hitchhike…you see I…well…’ Grant petered out miserably.

Again the man looked at him ruminatively.

‘What’s it worth?’

Dear God, he’d met probably the one man in the west who would demand money for a ride.

‘I’m afraid I’m broke.That’s why I’m begging rides.’

And that probably settled it. The man would be afraid he’d have to feed him, and it seemed too bloody foolish to say that he intended to shoot his food. Shoot! Perhaps…

But the man was speaking: ‘It should be worth a couple of quid.’

‘It would be,’ said Grant,’but I’m really flat broke—look…’

‘Tell you what, make it a quid and it’s a deal.’

‘I’m sorry, but I’ve only got six bob, but I’ll tell you what, I’ve got a rifle…I’ll give you that if you’ll take me through.’

‘What sort of rifle?’

If only he could spit in this man’s face and walk out.

‘Twenty-two. Quite a good one…and about a hundred rounds of ammunition.’

‘Where’s the rifle?’

‘Over in my case, near your truck. I’ll get it.’

God curse the man’s swinish face, thought Grant, as he hurried over to his cases. The loss of the rifle didn’t worry him, but having to travel with an animal like that did. Still, to make the trip in one run was worth a great deal. He wrapped the pieces of the rifle in an old plastic raincoat because he felt he was already drawing enough attention in the bar.

The man was draining a glass as Grant arrived back. He took the rifle without comment and examined it.

Then he said: ‘What about the ammo?’

Grant took the rounds from his pockets.

‘Sorry I haven’t got a box.’

The man took them and dropped them into his own pockets. Did that mean the deal was made?

‘There’s not a hundred there,’ said the man.

‘I’m sorry. I thought there probably was.That’s all I’ve got.’

‘All right. I’ll take you. But you ride in the back.’

‘OK.Thanks.’ Grant couldn’t work out why he had to ride in the back; probably the man hoped to sell the front seat to somebody else. In any case he was grateful because that meant he might be able to sleep.

‘Let’s have a drink,’ said the man, and a cold hand spread around Grant’s stomach. The devil and blast it! Was this the stock conversation of everybody west of the Great Dividing Range? Of course it was. He knew that already. But…ah well,he could not afford to quarrel with this man as he had with the other two drivers.

‘Surely,’ he said, ‘but it’ll have to be my last for the trip, a couple of rounds’ll clean me out.’

‘It’ll be the last for the trip, I’m going straight through.’

‘Going straight through.’ The grateful words consoled Grant for the three shillings he paid for the two glasses of beer—it was even more expensive at Yelonda than at Bundanyabba.

His companion almost immediately turned his back on him and began a mirthless conversation with the man alongside him with whom he apparently had some business dealings.

Grant drank his beer without pleasure. The taste nauseated him and his empty stomach rebelled. Still, it soothed his parched mouth and throat. He must remember to fill his water bottle.

‘Going straight through’—that meant he might well be in Sydney before the Sunday.

When the beer was finished the man ordered two more without looking at Grant and made no move to pay for them. Grant waited as long as possible but it was obvious that he was expected to pay. So he did. And that left him with seven-pence.

He stood sipping his beer in utter humiliation, aware that he would accept any sort of treatment from this fat-faced swine rather than lose the lift through to Sydney.

The beer drunk, the fat man waved again at the bartender, and Grant interrupted nervously: ‘I’m afraid that cleans me out. Would it be all right if I waited in the truck?’

The man turned to him, his face expressionless.

‘Cleans you out? You mean you got no more money?’

‘I told you I’m broke,’ said Grant, pleadingly. ‘I’m sorry, but that’s the way it is.’ Couldn’t the bloody fool understand English?

The man looked at him for a while.

‘All right,’ he said, ‘you wait in the truck. I’m gonna have a few more.’

‘Thanks,’ said Grant wretchedly, and turned away.

‘Here,’ said the fat man, ‘if you’re really broke I don’t want to take this off you.’ He held out the rifle.

Grant looked at him, stupefied.

‘Take the bloody thing.’

‘But I…’

‘Take it.’ There was nothing gracious in the man’s manner. Grant took it.

‘Thanks,’ he said, utterly routed.

‘Here. I’ll buy you a bloody beer.’

‘No. No thanks. I’d really rather wait in the truck if it’s all right with you. Thanks very much all the same.’

‘Just as you like,’ and the man turned to his business friend.

Grant went blindly back to the semitrailer, shaking with humiliation. Bad enough to beg, but to be treated with that blasted, disinterested contempt, God damn it all! He sat down on a suitcase, trembling bodily.

Then, after a moment, what did it matter? This was all the price to be paid for folly, and it wouldn’t last for ever.

He explored under the canvas of the trailer and found plenty of space alongside rows of crates piled one on top of the other. Packing the rifle back in one suitcase, he pushed the two of them under the canvas and climbed in after them.

Inside he pulled out some of his older clothes and fashioned a pillow, then stretched out on the wooden floor.

It was very hot and stuffy, but he was past caring.

A mildly sick pain in his stomach reminded him that he had not eaten for several hours and he sat up again to ferret the half-rabbit out of the suitcase.

The smell assailed him as he unwrapped it; meat spoiled quickly in that climate, and being wrapped in a shirt in a suitcase had not helped stay the processes of decay.

He gnawed at it a little, but it was too sickening and finally he ejected it under the flap of the canvas.

Could a man live for four or five days without food? He had better try to buy half a loaf of bread with his remaining sevenpence.

He seemed to be lying there for hours, listening to the steady noise made by the men drinking in the half a dozen hotels within earshot, the mechanical voices and constant gunshots from the theatre, the thud of horses’ hooves on the road outside, the growl and clatter of the occasional car or truck, the disembodied voices of people walking, scraps of conversation, flat and removed from their context, and then at last the sound of the door of the semitrailer opening and shutting.

A voice, slightly slurred: ‘Are you in there?’

‘Yes, thanks,’ called Grant.

Nothing more.

The engine clanked into life, the gear engaged, the vehicle shuddered and they were on the road.

At first the movement was soothing, then uncomfortable, and within an hour every jolt jarred against his bones; but he was moving, moving east towards the sea, towards Sydney and perhaps even towards Robyn. But Robyn was a fleeting thought he did not feel qualified to entertain.

After much experimenting he found that the best way to lie was on the flat of his back with his hands clasped behindhis head. He wondered how long it would be before the driver stopped to sleep. He knew that transport drivers performed prodigious feats of endurance to cover vast distances with only snatches of sleep. This man had probably only come from Bundanyabba that afternoon and he might travel another three or four hundred miles before stopping. The semitrailer seemed to be moving extremely quickly for so cumbersome a vehicle.

Now that the problem of getting to Sydney had been satisfactorily overcome he had better think about what he would do when he got there.

It wasn’t all that hopeless really, he supposed.The semitrailer was based at Wyton, so it might well go straight there. He could leave his cases somewhere and walk to a friend’s place at Double Bay where he could quite decently borrow a pound or two. Then he would go to his uncle and explain that he was in difficulties; there would be no need to be strictly accurate after all. His uncle would give him food and lodging temporarily and he could get some sort of work. Perhaps there might even be pleasure left for him in his vacation.

If only he didn’t feel so damned sick. And there were so many things. He felt stained; he needed to rid himself of something that had penetrated since he had gone to Bundanyabba. He wanted something like the confessional that Roman Catholics had.

Still, that would pass. He had achieved his escape from Bundanyabba. He was on his way to Sydney, and a bath and a good night’s sleep and a decent meal would make things a lot simpler, probably.

Wouldn’t it have been wonderful if he had never gone near the Two-up school; or better if he had not gone back the second time? He might have been with Robyn now, walking somewhere, somewhere cool, by the sea.

Sleep advanced on Grant with many and fearsome dreams which made him start upright, knocking his head on the crates. But gradually he settled down into a sort of fitful coma from which he burst occasionally, oppressed by an awful sense of despair.

And finally he slipped into a glittering, bright dream that was not about anything much except that it all seemed very clean and sunny, just a great area of innocent light.

And through that light a voice from a long way off, then closer and closer:

‘All right. You’re here! Hey, inside there! You’re here!’

Grant awoke to the darkness, confused. An urgent need to understand the voice conflicted with his inability to orientate himself. Then as his thoughts settled into order, despairing fear set in.

Frantically he clawed aside the canvas. The man wasstanding in front of him. God! get out of the way, where was he?

It was a wide street.

With street lamps.

And shops, many shops on either side.

Grant stared and stared and knew he must go mad.

He was in the main street of Bundanyabba.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

[4]

From a great emptiness that seemed to have engulfed him Grant heard his own voice saying, very gently: ‘You know, I thought you were going to Sydney.’

‘Dunno why.’

Grant pointed to the sign on the door of the driving cabin.

‘That was where I bought it, never took it off. I run between ‘Londa and The Yabba.’

‘But you said you were going to Sydney. Why did you say you were going to Sydney?’ What did it matter, anyway?

‘I never said anything about Sydney,’ said the driver, climbing back into the cabin, ‘you said you wanted to go through to the city—well, this is a city isn’t it, mate?’

The door of the cabin closed.

‘Anyway,’ added the driver, as he started the engine, ‘the trip didn’t cost you anything.’

‘That’s not exactly the point,’ said Grant softly as the truck pulled away leaving him standing beside his suitcases in the middle of Bundanyabba.

He watched the truck until it turned around a corner, vaguely surprised that he was not so much upset as utterly devoid of any sensation apart from this impression of emptiness.

After all, this was the end. Perhaps there was nothing more to fear.

With no idea of where he was going he picked up his suitcases and began walking once more down the street.

It was very late and the only activity was around the hotels.

Thoughts came to Grant now as a series of stunning impossibilities. He could not go on walking for ever. But there was nowhere for him to stop. He could not stay in Bundanyabba for five weeks. He could not leave Bundanyabba without any money or supplies, not even ammunition for the rifle. The whole thing was just a morass of hopelessness. There was nothing he could do.

He just walked and walked until sheer fatigue made him stop. He was somewhere near the eastern end of the main street, opposite some sort of park.

The park offered escape from the street, so he turned and went into it, walking over the dried roots of grass until he came to a tree. Then he put his cases down and sat with his back against the tree and looked at the stars. For a long while he sat with his head back, looking at the stars, wondering at their remoteness, marvelling that they, unchanged, should still be part of his world, which was shattered.

And then after a long time his mind went back to the things that had happened to him, and he almost smiled at the enormous absurdity of it all.

But what was so fantastic was that there had been no element of necessity about it all. It was as though he had deliberately set about destroying himself; and yet one thing had seemed to lead to the next.

But he needn’t have done any of it.

He shook his head, then let it fall back against the rough bark of the tree and closed his eyes to the stars.

He needn’t have done any of it. He hadn’t had to play Two-up. And when he had won, nothing forced him to go back. He need not have got drunk with Tim Hynes; there had not even been any point in that. And even though he had been drunk he had decided of his own volition to seduce Janette Hynes—to try to seduce Janette Hynes.

He need not have gone shooting with the miners, not thatthere had been anything in that as such; but there was no reason why he should have got drunk again and gone on the orgy of killing. And if he had not done that there would not be the echo of horror in his mind about what followed.

Strange, now, he did not mind thinking about anything. Perhaps because nothing mattered, now; it was all finished, there was nothing he could do.

Of course there had come a point where decision was not involved. The business of the bursts of light in the night and the foulness he suspected went with them had not had much to do with his decisions, except that what he had done earlier had led to them.

Everything had led to something else. There had been no necessity about any of it, but each event had carried within it the seed of the next.

Chance had played some part, that ridiculous business with the semitrailer had hardly been a matter of his choosing; and yet even that would not have happened had he not been wrecked by drink.

At almost every stage of his personal little tragedy he could remember a point of decision where he could have made it otherwise.

And now here he was, with sevenpence, a rifle and no ammunition, and several boxes of matches. And he was sickand weak and would have been in despair if any emotion could have penetrated the cloud of emptiness or nothingness that surrounded him.

And all he was going to do was sit here and wait, and if nothing happened he would probably die, and so what?

He put his hands in his pockets and let himself slide down until he was lying almost flat.

Then his right hand encountered a small cylindrical object, hard and cool. He felt around it. It was a cartridge, he must have missed it when he gave the others to the driver in the hotel. He took it out and sat up to examine it. He had one cartridge.

It looked a harmless little piece of metal in the light of the stars, but it could be used to kill.

Why not to kill John Grant?

Other people killed themselves. It had been done.

It would be a solution to the immediate problem and would intercept any problems he might have in the future.

Why not?

He looked at the cartridge and rolled it around in his fingers. It was very small.

Why not?

Anyway, he would think about it for a while, get out the rifle and load it, see how the proposition looked then.

The precise operation of assembling the rifle was comforting in a way. He put the cartridge into the breech and pushed the bolt home.

With the loaded weapon across his knees he thought: this could be used to remove John Grant from Bundanyabba and Tiboonda and himself for ever.

All he had to do was point it at his head and pull the trigger.

He reversed the rifle and put the muzzle against his forehead. It was quite cool, cool and hard.

But he could not reach the trigger comfortably this way. He experimented with his finger. He would have to push the trigger, not pull it.

Many suicides—suicides, the word had a chilling quality— put the muzzle in their mouth. He tried it that way. The taste of gunmetal was quite distinct. But this way the bullet would tear up through his palate, burning and gouging. He took the muzzle out of his mouth.

Through the heart? He tried pointing the rifle at his body, but it was almost impossible to reach the trigger that way.

In any case, it seemed better in some way to shoot himself through the head, more necessarily final.

And his head did not seem so vulnerable.

That was a foolish thought.

He cradled the rifle in his arms. It was held by some that suicide was an evil thing. Catholics argued that it meant damnation. What precisely did they mean by damnation? He preferred the pantheistic ‘now he is part of the loveliness which once he made more lovely’.Was that how it went? Anyway he had not made anything more lovely. Quite the reverse.

Chesterton used to say that the great wrong in suicide was that it destroyed one’s whole world. All right, he didn’t mind destroying the whole world, not at all.

Even Robyn?

But Robyn was a dream, a white-skirted dream. Whether he killed himself or not, Robyn was in another world.

Another world? Supposing he precipitated himself into some other life. But the cold stars assured him there was no other life.

The fact was he could either kill himself or not kill himself. He simply had to make the decision.

There was another point of decision. He could either do it or not do it, and from that decision would flow the consequences. But there would be no consequences if he killed himself. There would be nothing.

Probably there would be nothing. A lot of people hadargued that there was something after death. And what if that something were unpleasant for suicides? But since he had never believed it to be wrong to commit suicide how could he suffer for it?

This was nonsense. Where had the suggestion of suffering come from? Suffering was here and now. If he killed himself he would be dead and that was an end to it.

But the question of decision? Was this the one act that absolved man from all the consequences and responsibilities of his own decisions. Of course it was. If he killed himself he would be dead, and that was an end to it.

He drew back the bolt of the rifle until he heard the double click which meant it was cocked.

Now it needed only the slightest pressure of his finger and John Grant would come to an end and his troubles would be over.

It was strange that he was so reluctant to kill himself. It was quite a good idea really.There would be no pain, just oblivion, for ever, he supposed. It would be quite reasonable to kill oneself just to find out what happened then. So it must be all the more reasonable to kill oneself to solve a problem.

He seemed to be advancing arguments to himself to justify suiciding. Well, it didn’t hurt to think about it awhile.

But damn it all! there was nothing else to do; tomorrow offered no hope.

Was the problem sufficiently grave to warrant this? Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow for five weeks in the heat of Bundanyabba with no money and no food and nowhere to go, and then a year in Tiboonda…yes, it was grave. And besides, the John Grant he had once been was a soiled miserable creature now.

He rested the muzzle against his head, holding the barrel in both hands, the butt on the ground.

He was really sick to death of himself, he wanted to be rid of John Grant.

And why should John Grant not be got rid of?

To hell with it! If it suited him he would suicide.

And it did suit him. His hands clenched on the barrel. Get it over with! Do it! Make the decision! Push the bloody trigger!

But first, just one moment to wish it were otherwise, that he might have been a little more like the man he once thought he was. And just one moment to think of Robyn and the sea.

The emptiness evaporated and pain flooded around. He felt the tears burning his eyes and spilling down his cheeks and he did not know whether he meant to do it or not, butOh God life was a mess and, sobbing, he reached out and pushed the trigger.

THE IMPACT WAS DREADFUL

and then just nothing.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

[5]

In the night the train rocked along the single track, over the plain, under the stars past the yellow squares of light in the windows of homesteads. It rocked and swayed and rattled and set up a lulling rhythm of sound and motion which the singers caught and blended with the rhythm of their song.

They sang; for a song, once learned, takes a long time to die in the west:

‘There is a heart that’s made for you,

A heart that needs your love divine,

A heart that could be strong and true,

If only you would say you’re mine.

If we should part my heart would break,

Oh say that this will never be.

Oh darling please, your promise make,

That you’ll belong to only me.’

The floors of the train were littered with scraps of paper and food, and every now and then a bottle shot out of a window, kept pace with the train for a few seconds, then dropped unbroken on to the dust of the plain.

For reasons known only to himself the driver would sound the steam whistle and the melancholy wail would stretch out over the darkened land, and kangaroos and cattle and foxes and dingoes would raise their heads enquiringly before going about their business.

John Grant sat, travelling backwards, in a window seat, looking out into the night.

He was smoking, and every now and then he would take the cigarette from his mouth and raise his hand to his forehead feeling a fresh scar in his closely cropped hair.

He looked with satisfaction at the glass in the window. Lately he had developed a deep affection for the normal, simple trappings of being alive. Wood, and paint, and smells, and the feel of cloth, and the taste of food, and the comfort of cigarettes, and glass—now glass was a wonderful thing…

…Glass was the first thing he had seen when he recoveredconsciousness in hospital. A glass syringe, a huge glass syringe in the hand of a nurse. And he was on a sort of trolley in a white room without any windows.

The nurse pushed him so that he rolled over and his buttocks were exposed—he seemed to be wearing something like a white nightgown which stretched only to his waist, no, it had been rolled up.

The nurse plunged the needle of the syringe into his buttock and pushed the plunger. Grant saw about a quarter of a pint of clear fluid expressed from the syringe into his flesh.

‘What’s that?’ he said.

‘Oh, you’re awake?’ said the nurse. She was about thirty and rather plain.

‘What is that stuff?’

‘Anti-gas gangrene.’

Suddenly Grant was aware that a huge pain surrounded his head. It had been there all the time but it had been so great he had not noticed it. It was a shocking pain.

And he wasn’t dead at all.

He lay his head back.

‘How bad am I?’ he said.

‘I couldn’t say,’ said the nurse. ‘You’d better ask the doctor. Not very bad I’d say; a bit of concussion.’

Grant raised his hand to his head and encountered a bandage.

‘How did it happen?’ asked the nurse.

Was it possible she did not know? Was it possible that no one knew he was now that most ludicrous of all beings, the unsuccessful suicide?

‘I’m not sure,’ said Grant, and the nurse seemed satisfied with that.

She pushed the trolley out of the room into a corridor, into a lift, into another corridor and into a smaller room. Gently she tumbled him off the trolley on to a bed.The room was quite bare apart from the bed and a small wooden chest.

She pulled a sheet over him and asked: ‘Would you like something to eat?’

‘Yes, please. I think so, and something to drink, and, nurse? I have the most frightful pain in my head.’

‘Well, what do you expect?’

She went out and shut the door after her. He heard the lock turn. He braced his head against the pain and looked around the room: only one small window, high on the rear wall.

So they knew it was attempted suicide after all…Now, sitting in the train, listening almost with affection to the singers, it seemed incredible that he had tried to shatter hisown brains. But it had been different back there under the tree that night.

One of the men opposite mutely offered him a swig from a whisky bottle he had almost emptied in the past half-hour. Grant shook his head and said: ‘No thanks.’ The man scowled at him and drank the whisky himself.

That shirt the fellow was wearing looked like part of a police uniform…

…The last time he had seen a shirt like that was in the hospital. The doctor had just seen him. A tall, well-dressed fellow, the doctor had been, wearing a white flower in his buttonhole.

‘How are you feeling?’ he asked in a pleasant, rich voice.

‘Not bad. I’ve got a hell of a pain in my head. Are you the doctor?’

‘Yes, one of them.’

‘What happened?’

‘I think you’d know that better than I would.’

Grant realised he should have been embarrassed at that, but he didn’t care much.

‘No, I mean where did the bullet hit me?’

‘Top of the forehead. It cut a chunk out of your skull. You’ve got a dose of concussion, but you’ll be all right.’

‘Have I had an operation?’

‘No, I just cleaned you up.’

‘How did I get here?’

‘The police brought you here.’

‘How long will I be here?’

‘That depends—where do you live?’

‘Sydney.’

‘Well you won’t be able to travel for a month, maybe longer.’

‘Oh.’ Still that was not so bad. In fact, it more or less solved things for him.That was funny really, the bullet had not been utterly misspent.

‘There’s a policeman outside to see you. Do you feel up to talking to him?’

‘Oh yes, I suppose I’ll have to.’

‘You don’t have to immediately, you know. I can put him off for a while.’ The doctor was really a kind man.

‘Thanks very much, but it doesn’t matter. I might as well get it over with.’

‘I wouldn’t worry too much. They’re pretty tolerant of this sort of thing in Bundanyabba. I’ll send him in.’

Grant knew the policeman would be Crawford. It was.

‘Hello, John,’ he said, looking rather foolish.

‘Greetings,’ said Grant, and waited.

‘Don’t like to bother you, John, but there’s a kind offormality when a gunshot wound is admitted to the hospital, you understand.’

‘Surely,’ said Grant. ‘Don’t worry, go ahead and ask what you want.’

‘Well,’ said Crawford, almost shaking with embarrassment, ‘it’s like this: I thought, so as not to tire you like, I’d write out a statement of what probably happened and you could sign it like, if it was all right. How’s that?’

‘Fine by me.’ What happened to people convicted of attempting suicide? Weren’t they sent to lunatic asylums?

Crawford pulled a sheet of paper out of his pocket and handed it to Grant.

With some effort he held it up with one hand and read: ‘The gunshot wound to my head was the result of an accident. I was returning from a shooting trip and carrying my .22 rifle. I stopped to rest in a park off Randon Street, and believing the rifle to be unloaded I dropped it to the ground butt first. It exploded and that is all I remember.’

Grant looked up at Crawford and smiled.

‘That’d be about it wouldn’t it, John?’ said Crawford, looking at his feet.

‘Sure, that’s about it.Thanks, mate.’

‘Could you manage to sign it, do you think, John?’

Grant signed the paper with Crawford’s pen.

‘Thanks, John. We won’t need to bother you any more. Be seeing you around.’ And Crawford left as hurriedly as possible…

…The temperature inside the carriage rose steadily as the journey progressed, and the sweat rolled down the passengers’ faces in drops, flickering and shaking with the motion of the train.

Grant lit another cigarette and blew the smoke out of the window to be whipped to nothing by the rushing air. The heat was making him ill, he’d become unaccustomed to it while he was in hospital. Hospitalisation had proved not unpleasant as it had happened, lying there in the coolness induced by air-conditioning, on clean sheets, with the clean aseptic pain in his head eliminating subjective thought. It had been quite pleasant really, a period to be looked back on as one of non-disturbance, except for one day, when he had been there about a fortnight…

…They would not let him out of bed, and his room was always kept locked. He supposed that was because they thought he might try to commit suicide again. It did not matter, he was quite content to just lie there.

An electric bell with a push-button in the wall just to the right of his head enabled him to summon a nurse when necessary.

One push meant he needed a urine bottle, two meant a bedpan, three meant a general call to be answered when convenient and four meant an emergency call.

Grant had suffered a great deal with the first two in his early days in hospital but he became resigned.

On this day, reconciled after some debate to the necessity, he pushed the button twice.

The nurses were quite prompt and it was only a couple of minutes before he heard the lock turn in the door. A nurse came in carrying the detested vessel decently shrouded in a white cloth.

Grant pulled himself into a sitting position, his face the careful blank he employed on these occasions.

Then he looked at the nurse’s face.

It was Janette Hynes.

For one second his soul shrieked at the impossibility of this, the last humiliation, but then he realised that that was only the way he thought he ought to feel. In fact, it didn’t matter, it was only happening to John Grant.

Just the same, he would if necessary suffer internal injury rather than use that particular pan.

Janette said: ‘Hullo, I heard you were here.’

‘Yes,’ said Grant, ‘I’m here.’

She stood by the bed, still holding the pan, probably asembarrassed as he was, thought Grant, but she didn’t show it.

There didn’t seem much to say that could be said, but somebody had to say something.

‘Sorry about that call,’ said Grant, ‘I meant to push three times. Just wanted some more water whenever anybody was passing.’

Janette looked at the water jug by his bed. Grant looked at it. It was almost full.

Janette put the pan on the bed.

‘It’s all right,’ she said, ‘I’m only a nurse here.’And she went out.

Grant used the pan eventually, there was nothing else he could do. And Janette came back and took it away…

…The sadness of the plains at night was for some reason much more apparent from the inside of a moving train, thought Grant. Perhaps it was because of the people singing; the thread of melancholy which ran through even the most boisterous of their songs was something that was part of them, possibly born of this very sadness of the plains. All his memories of Bundanyabba and the people he had met there were tinged now with this plaintive, suppressed misery.

They had all been sad; Crawford, the policeman, the people at the Two-up Game,Tim Hynes and his daughter,Tydon and the miners, the people who had given him lifts.

Even the almoner at the hospital had left him with an impression of sadness, he didn’t know why…

…They had given him back his suitcases and taken him to the almoner’s office where he had been presented with a bill for twenty-four pounds.

‘I can’t possibly pay this for a while,’ Grant said.

‘I couldn’t care less,’ said the almoner amiably. ‘Whenever you can manage it.’

‘Thanks,’ said Grant, ‘I’ll pay it in about two months.’

‘You’re a schoolteacher, aren’t you?’ said the almoner. ‘Sit down for a moment, why don’t you?’

Grant sat down.

‘Cigarette?’

Now that was a thought.There had been no real hope of cigarettes in the hospital and he had almost forgotten about them.

‘Thanks.’ The first intake of smoke was delicious, but it made him dizzy.

‘This is a damn silly question,’ said the almoner,’but you’re feeling quite all right now, aren’t you?’

‘Yes. Quite all right, thanks.’

‘I mean…’

‘Oh, I see.’ Of course it would be the almoner’s job to see that Grant did not immediately go and undo all the hospital’swork by successfully blowing his brains out.

‘Quite all right in that line, thanks. I was just broke and feeling sorry for myself. It’s all over now.’

‘Quite sure?’

Grant thought a moment.

‘Reasonably sure. As sure as one can be about these things.’ He smiled.

The almoner smiled back.

‘All right,’ she said. ‘What are your plans now?’

‘I haven’t got any.’

‘Got any money?’

‘No.’ How many conversations of this sort did the almoner go through with frustrated suicides?

‘We’ve got a sort of fund here to deal with things like this, you know,’ said the almoner, ‘I could let you have a loan of twenty pounds.’

‘That’s an extraordinary thing, surely?’

‘Not really. The Rotary Club keeps it up. There’s quite a need for it. Could you use the loan?’

Grant wondered whether the offer was extended to any indigent patient of the hospital, or only to would-be suicides.

‘Yes. I could, thanks.’

The almoner gave him the money, and he signed a form promising to pay it back within six months if he could.

‘That’s fixed that,’ said the almoner, ‘I’ll let you get away…’

…The train stopped, as western trains will do, miles from anywhere, for some reason known only to the driver. The sudden ending of motion and the violent drop in the noise level had a curious lulling effect. Even the singers were quiet and everybody looked out into the silent night. Grant recognised it as one of those moments he would always be able to reach. Another one had been when he walked out of the hospital earlier that day…

Leaving the air-conditioning and meeting the heat once more was very much like starting life all over again. He stood on the hospital steps realising how suspended and unreal his life had been in hospital. With nothing to do, with people bringing him his food, making his bed, even attending to his bathing, he had entered into that trance-like state that comes to people removed from any serious independent action, like prisoners in jail or ‘other ranks’ in the armed services.

But the first waves of heat which rolled up at him from the blistering road and beat down from the glaring haze of the sky dried up his trance and he became once more John Grant, responsible for himself.

Which is not, he thought, such a gravely important matter as one might suppose…

…The train had started again and was rocking through the night with renewed intensity as though anxious to make up for its lapse in stopping.

The singing began again; but there had been a change of mood now, and somebody had started playing a mouth organ, and as though shyly admitting for once the west’s great burden of unhappiness, they sang:

‘But hark there’s the wail of a dingo,

Watchful and weird; I must go,

For it tolls the death knell of a stockman

From the gloom of the scrub down below.’

Grant moved his body on the seat and plucked at his sweat-sodden clothes to detach them from his skin. He wondered how long he would be able to maintain this sense of satisfaction at being able to feel anything, even minor discomfort. Not for long, he thought, probably not for much longer than it would take the hair to completely cover the scar on his head so that he would not be constantly reminded how near he had come to never feeling anything again…

…He had been very conscious of that scar while he was in the hotel earlier that day, waiting for the train that was due in an hour’s time.

He leaned on the bar with his left elbow so that he could feel the scar by resting his head on his hand. In his right hand he held a glass of beer. The babble of voices formed a cocoon of sound around him and he felt isolated, which was how he wanted to feel just then.

He was absorbed in the taste of tobacco, the feel of the glass in his hand, the prosaic wonder of the solidity of the floorboards beneath his feet.

‘I will never, never get drunk again,’ he said softly, and added, ‘Except in good company.’

He looked around at the drinking men, and the sweating barmaid in the smoky fug of the bar.

A vivid joyousness quickened in him simply at being there, alive…

…The train stopped again and Grant stepped out on to the railway siding called Tiboonda Station.

He was the only passenger to alight and he waited on the platform until the train pulled away again. As it went he could hear the fading voices of the singers, still voicing the lament of the stockman:

‘Wrap me up in my stockwhip and blanket

And bury me deep down below,

Where the dingoes and crows won’t molest me,

In the shade where the coolibahs grow.’

And soon Grant was standing alone under the stars, the train a silent line of yellow squares growing smaller.

He stood looking up, dazed and exhilarated by the brilliant, wild placidity, the riotous order of the stars.

Then he thought, almost aloud:

I can see quite clearly the ingenuity whereby a man may be made mean or great by exactly the same circumstances.

I can see quite clearly that even if he chooses meanness the things he brings about can even then be welded into a pattern of sanity for him to take advantage of if he wishes.

‘What I can’t altogether see’—he turned his eyes from the stars to the blackness of the plains and back to the stars again—’what I can’t altogether see is why I should be permitted to be alive, and to know these things…’

He picked up his suitcases and began walking towards the patch of light where he knew Charlie the publican would be waiting, his curiosity about to be excited by the scar on Grant’s forehead.

‘…But I feel that I will probably find out sometime.’

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

WAKE IN FRIGHT—THE MOVIE

David Stratton

When the film version of Kenneth Cook’s novelWake in Frightopened in a limited number of Australian capital-city cinemas in the autumn of 1971, it foreshadowed the revival of local filmmaking after a drought that had lasted thirty years. Australia had pioneered the production of feature films (the one-hour plusThe Story of the Kelly Gangwas made here in 1906, six years before the first American feature-length films were released) and throughout the teens of the twentieth century audiences flocked to see local films. This situation gradually changed as producers in Hollywood consolidated an international star system, which has remained in place to this day, and American distributors began to control the world’s cinemas. Australian directors such as Raymond Longford and Franklyn Barrett, and, later, Charles Chauvel and Ken G. Hall, did manage to sustain a small local industry until World War II brought it to a virtual stop. Not a completestop though, because some dogged battlers, like Rupert Kathner and Cecil Holmes, struggled on making very low budget Australian films, but they were faced with the insurmountable odds of blocked access to major cinemas and government and public indifference.

The high-profile ‘Australian’ films made during this period weren’t Australian productions at all. Most of them, includingThe Overlanders, Eureka Stockade, Bush Christmas, The Shiralee, Smiley, The Siege of Pinchgutand the 1957 version ofRobbery under Arms,were British films, often shot in studios in the UK with Australia used only for the location work; others, includingKangaroo, On the BeachandThe Sundowners,were mainstream Hollywood productions made on location here. A year before the arrival ofWake in Fright,British director Nicolas Roeg, using American funding, had madeWalkaboutin central Australia; it wasn’t strictly speaking an Australian film and though it was originally a box-office failure its reputation gradually grew.

A couple of years afterWake in Frightwas published in 1961, the blacklisted American director Joseph Losey, who was then based in London, took an option on the film rights. In 1963, Losey had directed Dirk Bogarde inThe Servant,which was a critical and commercial success, and he doubtless saw another powerful role for Bogarde as John Grant, Cook’sschoolteacher protagonist. The film was never made and the option lapsed. It was picked up eventually by NLT, an Australian television production company run by Jack Neary and Channel Nine entertainer Bobby Limb (who had, for years, produced the popular showThe Sound of Music— nothing to do with the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical) with his wife, Dawn Lake. In the era before government support for film and television production, NLT formed a partnership with the American company Group W, a division of Westinghouse Broadcasting, to make feature films in Australia.The first NLT-Group W production was the mediocreSqueeze a Flower(1970), an attempt to cash in on the huge success of Michael Powell’sThey’re a Weird Mob,made four years earlier, by featuring that film’s Italian star, Walter Chiari, in a comedy set in the Hunter Valley of New South Wales. The film was wanly directed by American television hack Marc Daniels and was a deserved failure.Wake in Frightbecame the second NLT-Group W production.

The screenplay was the work of Jamaican-born British writer Evan Jones, who had written four Joseph Losey films(Eva, The Damned, King and CountryandModesty Blaise)and who had also, significantly, scriptedTwo Gentlemen Sharing(1969), a British film about an inter-racial gay relationship directed by a Canadian, Ted Kotcheff. Jones’Wake in Frightscreenplay is remarkable given the fact (for which I am indebted to Tony Buckley, the editor ofWake in Fright)that he had never been to Australia and indeed first visited the country in the 1980s.

Kotcheff, like many other Canadians and Australians during this period, had moved to Britain to work in the film and television industry and directed his first British feature in 1962. Although he later made the first Rambo feature,First Blood(1982), and the popular farceWeekend at Bernie’s(1989), Kotcheff has never made a film as uncompromisingly excellent asWake in Fright.

In his forthcoming autobiography, Tony Buckley suggests that Kotcheff was profoundly affected by his first visit to Broken Hill, the western New South Wales mining city that is the real-life equivalent of Cook’s Bundanyabba. Many of the details incorporated into Jones’ screenplay (such as the atmosphere of the RSL club) were witnessed firsthand by the Canadian. It’s often the case that foreign directors who make their first film in another country will include detail that might not occur to someone local. Among the superlative films which have benefitted from a foreigner’s eye areSweet Smell of SuccessandMidnight Cowboy(both made by British directors in New York) andThe Servant(an American director in London). There are countless other examples butWake in Frightis one of the best; probably no Australian director in 1971 could have filmed such a bleak vision of life in an outback city.

And there’s no doubt that Kotcheff's film paints a grim picture of the menace lurking just beneath the surface of the Yabba. The ghastly hospitality which forces the stranger to keep drinking whether he wants to or not; the sexual frustration, as depicted by Sylvia Kay (Kotcheff's ex-wife) in one of the film’s strongest scenes; the very notion that a man who would prefer to have a conversation with a woman rather than swill beer with his drunken mates (as Gary Bond’s John Grant does) must be a schoolteacher or a queer. Above all, the nightmarish kangaroo hunt, brilliantly staged by Kotcheff, photographed by Brian West and edited by Buckley. This sequence puts conventional horror films to shame, and is in addition brilliantly acted by Jack Thompson and Peter Whittle as the pair of mindless thugs who initiate the carnage.

Bond is extremely effective as the wretched Grant, sinking ever deeper into a sweaty, alcoholic haze, as is Donald Pleasence as the confronting Doc. But the film’s greatest performance is that of Chips Rafferty, who had played a major role both as actor and producer in Australian cinema since Charles Chauvel cast him inForty Thousand Horsemenin 1941. In his final film (he died in May 1971, just five weeks afterthe film’s first press preview), Rafferty—who was born in Broken Hill—portrays the local police chief with tremendous subtlety, exuding mateship in the finest Australian tradition while hinting at the sinister side to his quietly overbearing character. He had never given a performance of such depth before this; which, again, is a tribute to Kotcheff's skills as a director.

Wake in Frightis beautifully made; West’s cinematography allows us to feel the heat of this claustrophobic community with its incongruous Christmas decorations, and on every level the film succeeds in its vision of a hermetic world as seen through the horrified eyes of an outsider.That it received mixed reviews on its release is really no surprise, nor is it surprising that it was not a box-office success (except in France, where it played in competition at the Cannes Film Festival). But over the years its reputation has grown, and its re-release and first appearance on DVD should bring it a host of new admirers.

In the years following the release ofWake in Fright,government support for the Australian film industry became a fact of life and a new wave of local movies emerged:Picnic at Hanging Rock, Breaker Morant, Newsfront, The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith, My Brilliant Careerand many others. In this impressive company,Wake in Frightstands tall.

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================

Text Classics

For reading group notes visittextclassics.com.au

The Commandant

Jessica Anderson

Introduced by Carmen Callil

Homesickness

Murray Bail

Introduced by Peter Conrad

Sydney Bridge Upside Down

David Ballantyne

Introduced by Kate De Goldi

A Difficult Young Man

Martin Boyd

Introduced by Sonya Hartnett

The Australian Ugliness

Robin Boyd

Introduced by Christos Tsiolkas

The Even More Complete

Book of Australian Verse

John Clarke

Introduced by John Clarke

Diary of a Bad Year

JM Coetzee

Introduced by Peter Goldsworthy

Wake in Fright

Kenneth Cook

Introduced by Peter Temple

The Dying Trade

Peter Corris

Introduced by Charles Waterstreet

They’re a Weird Mob

Nino Culotta

Introduced by Jacinta Tynan

Careful, He Might Hear You

Sumner Locke Elliott

Introduced by Robyn Nevin

Terra Australis

Matthew Flinders

Introduced by Tim Flannery

My Brilliant Career

Miles Franklin

Introduced by Jennifer Byrne

Cosmo Cosmolino

Helen Garner

Introduced by Ramona Koval

Dark Places

Kate Grenville

Introduced by Louise Adler

The Watch Tower

Elizabeth Harrower

Introduced by Joan London

The Mystery of a Hansom Cab

Fergus Hume

Introduced by Simon Caterson

The Glass Canoe

David Ireland

Introduced by Nicolas Rothwell

The Jerilderie Letter

Ned Kelly

Introduced by Alex McDermott

Bring Larks and Heroes

Thomas Keneally

Introduced by Geordie Williamson

Strine

Afferbeck Lauder

Introduced by John Clarke

Stiff

Shane Maloney

Introduced by Lindsay Tanner

The Middle Parts of Fortune

Frederic Manning

Introduced by Simon Caterson

The Scarecrow

Ronald Hugh Morrieson

Introduced by Craig Sherborne

The Dig Tree

Sarah Murgatroyd

Introduced by Geoffrey Blainey

The Plains

Gerald Murnane

Introduced by Wayne Macauley

The Fortunes ofRichard Mahony

Henry Handel Richardson

Introduced by Peter Craven

The Women in Black

Madeleine St John

Introduced by Bruce Beresford

An Iron Rose

Peter Temple

Introduced by Les Carlyon

1788

Watkin Tench

Introduced by Tim Flannery

OceanofPDF.com

==================================================
